arXiv:1605.07725v4  [stat.ML]  16 Nov 2021Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
ADVERSARIAL TRAINING METHODS
FOR SEMI-SUPERVISED TEXT CLASSIFICATION
Takeru Miyato1,2∗, Andrew M Dai2, Ian Goodfellow3
takeru.miyato@gmail.com, adai@google.com, ian@openai. com
1Preferred Networks, Inc., ATR Cognitive Mechanisms Labora tories, Kyoto University
2Google Brain
3OpenAI
ABSTRACT
Adversarial training provides a means of regularizing supe rvised learning al-
gorithms while virtual adversarial training is able to exte nd supervised learn-
ing algorithms to the semi-supervised setting. However, bo th methods require
making small perturbations to numerous entries of the input vector, which
is inappropriate for sparse high-dimensional inputs such a s one-hot word rep-
resentations. We extend adversarial and virtual adversari al training to the
text domain by applying perturbations to the word embedding s in a recur-
rent neural network rather than to the original input itself . The proposed
method achieves state of the art results on multiple benchma rk semi-supervised
and purely supervised tasks. We provide visualizations and analysis show-
ing that the learned word embeddings have improved in qualit y and that
while training, the model is less prone to overﬁtting. Code i s available at
https://github.com/tensorﬂow/models/tree/master/res earch/adversarial_text.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Adversarial examples are examples that are created by making small perturbations to the input de-
signed to signiﬁcantly increase the loss incurred by a machi ne learning model (Szegedy et al., 2014;
Goodfellow et al., 2015). Several models, including state o f the art convolutional neural networks,
lack the ability to classify adversarial examples correctl y, sometimes even when the adversarial
perturbation is constrained to be so small that a human obser ver cannot perceive it. Adversarial
training is the process of training a model to correctly classify both unmodiﬁed examples and ad-
versarial examples. It improves not only robustness to adve rsarial examples, but also generalization
performance for original examples. Adversarial training r equires the use of labels when training
models that use a supervised cost, because the label appears in the cost function that the adversarial
perturbation is designed to maximize. Virtual adversarial training (Miyato et al., 2016) extends the
idea of adversarial training to the semi-supervised regime and unlabeled examples. This is done by
regularizing the model so that given an example, the model wi ll produce the same output distribution
as it produces on an adversarial perturbation of that exampl e. Virtual adversarial training achieves
good generalization performance for both supervised and se mi-supervised learning tasks.
Previous work has primarily applied adversarial and virtua l adversarial training to image classiﬁca-
tion tasks. In this work, we extend these techniques to text c lassiﬁcation tasks and sequence models.
Adversarial perturbations typically consist of making sma ll modiﬁcations to very many real-valued
inputs. For text classiﬁcation, the input is discrete, and u sually represented as a series of high-
dimensional one-hot vectors. Because the set of high-dimen sional one-hot vectors does not admit
inﬁnitesimal perturbation, we deﬁne the perturbation on co ntinuous word embeddings instead of dis-
crete word inputs. Traditional adversarial and virtual adv ersarial training can be interpreted both as a
regularization strategy (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015; Miyato et al., 2016) and as de-
fense against an adversary who can supply malicious inputs ( Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al.,
2015). Since the perturbed embedding does not map to any word and the adversary presumably does
not have access to the word embedding layer, our proposed tra ining strategy is no longer intended as
∗This work was done when the author was at Google Brain.
1Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
a defense against an adversary. We thus propose this approac h exclusively as a means of regularizing
a text classiﬁer by stabilizing the classiﬁcation function .
We show that our approach with neural language model unsuper vised pretraining as proposed
by Dai & Le (2015) achieves state of the art performance for mu ltiple semi-supervised text clas-
siﬁcation tasks, including sentiment classiﬁcation and to pic classiﬁcation. We emphasize that opti-
mization of only one additional hyperparameter ǫ, the norm constraint limiting the size of the adver-
sarial perturbations, achieved such state of the art perfor mance. These results strongly encourage
the use of our proposed method for other text classiﬁcation t asks. We believe that text classiﬁca-
tion is an ideal setting for semi-supervised learning becau se there are abundant unlabeled corpora
for semi-supervised learning algorithms to leverage. This work is the ﬁrst work we know of to use
adversarial and virtual adversarial training to improve a t ext or RNN model.
We also analyzed the trained models to qualitatively charac terize the effect of adversarial and vir-
tual adversarial training. We found that adversarial and vi rtual adversarial training improved word
embeddings over the baseline methods.
2 M ODEL
We denote a sequence of Twords as {w(t)|t= 1,...,T}, and a corresponding target as y. To
transform a discrete word input to a continuous vector, we de ﬁne the word embedding matrix V∈
R(K+1)×DwhereKis the number of words in the vocabulary and each row vkcorresponds to
the word embedding of the i-th word. Note that the (K+ 1) -th word embedding is used as an
embedding of an ‘end of sequence (eos)’ token, veos. As a text classiﬁcation model, we used a simple
LSTM-based neural network model, shown in Figure 1a. At time stept, the input is the discrete
wordw(t), and the corresponding word embedding is v(t). We additionally tried the bidirectional
veos 
weos y
w(2) w(3) v(3) v(2) LSTM 
w(1) v(1) 
(a) LSTM-based text classiﬁcation model.¯v(2) ¯v(3) veos r(2) r(3) 
w(2) w(3) weos y
LSTM 
¯v(1) r(1) 
w(1) 
(b) The model with perturbed embeddings.
Figure 1: Text classiﬁcation models with clean embeddings ( a) and with perturbed embeddings (b).
LSTM architecture (Graves & Schmidhuber, 2005) since this i s used by the current state of the
art method (Johnson & Zhang, 2016b). For constructing the bi directional LSTM model for text
classiﬁcation, we add an additional LSTM on the reversed seq uence to the unidirectional LSTM
model described in Figure 1. The model then predicts the labe l on the concatenated LSTM outputs
of both ends of the sequence.
In adversarial and virtual adversarial training, we train t he classiﬁer to be robust to perturbations of
the embeddings, shown in Figure 1b. These perturbations are described in detail in Section 3. At
present, it is sufﬁcient to understand that the perturbatio ns are of bounded norm. The model could
trivially learn to make the perturbations insigniﬁcant by l earning embeddings with very large norm.
To prevent this pathological solution, when we apply advers arial and virtual adversarial training
to the model we deﬁned above, we replace the embeddings vkwith normalized embeddings ¯vk,
deﬁned as:
¯vk=vk−E(v)/radicalbig
Var(v)whereE(v) =K/summationdisplay
j=1fjvj,Var(v) =K/summationdisplay
j=1fj(vj−E(v))2, (1)
wherefiis the frequency of the i-th word, calculated within all training examples.
2Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
3 A DVERSARIAL AND VIRTUAL ADVERSARIAL TRAINING
Adversarial training (Goodfellow et al., 2015) is a novel regularization method f or classiﬁers to
improve robustness to small, approximately worst case pert urbations. Let us denote xas the input
andθas the parameters of a classiﬁer. When applied to a classiﬁer , adversarial training adds the
following term to the cost function:
−logp(y|x+radv;θ) whereradv= argmin
r,/bardblr/bardbl≤ǫlogp(y|x+r;ˆθ) (2)
whereris a perturbation on the input and ˆθis a constant set to the current parameters of a classiﬁer.
The use of the constant copy ˆθrather than θindicates that the backpropagation algorithm should not
be used to propagate gradients through the adversarial exam ple construction process. At each step
of training, we identify the worst case perturbations radvagainst the current model p(y|x;ˆθ)in Eq.
(2), and train the model to be robust to such perturbations th rough minimizing Eq. (2) with respect
toθ. However, we cannot calculate this value exactly in general , because exact minimization with
respect to ris intractable for many interesting models such as neural ne tworks. Goodfellow et al.
(2015) proposed to approximate this value by linearizing logp(y|x;ˆθ)aroundx. With a linear
approximation and a L2norm constraint in Eq.(2), the resulting adversarial pertu rbation is
radv=−ǫg//ba∇dblg/ba∇dbl2whereg=∇xlogp(y|x;ˆθ).
This perturbation can be easily computed using backpropaga tion in neural networks.
Virtual adversarial training (Miyato et al., 2016) is a regularization method closely rel ated to adver-
sarial training. The additional cost introduced by virtual adversarial training is the following:
KL[p(· |x;ˆθ)||p(· |x+rv-adv;θ)] (3)
whererv-adv= argmax
r,/bardblr/bardbl≤ǫKL[p(· |x;ˆθ)||p(· |x+r;ˆθ)] (4)
whereKL[p||q]denotes the KL divergence between distributions pandq. By minimizing Eq.(3), a
classiﬁer is trained to be smooth. This can be considered as m aking the classiﬁer resistant to pertur-
bations in directions to which it is most sensitive on the cur rent model p(y|x;ˆθ). Virtual adversarial
loss Eq.(3) requires only the input xand does not require the actual label ywhile adversarial loss
deﬁned in Eq.(2) requires the label y. This makes it possible to apply virtual adversarial traini ng
to semi-supervised learning. Although we also in general ca nnot analytically calculate the virtual
adversarial loss, Miyato et al. (2016) proposed to calculat e the approximated Eq.(3) efﬁciently with
backpropagation.
As described in Sec. 2, in our work, we apply the adversarial p erturbation to word embeddings,
rather than directly to the input. To deﬁne adversarial pert urbation on the word embeddings, let us
denote a concatenation of a sequence of (normalized) word em bedding vectors [¯v(1),¯v(2),...,¯v(T)]
ass, and the model conditional probability of ygivensasp(y|s;θ)whereθare model parameters.
Then we deﬁne the adversarial perturbation radvonsas:
radv=−ǫg//ba∇dblg/ba∇dbl2whereg=∇slogp(y|s;ˆθ). (5)
To be robust to the adversarial perturbation deﬁned in Eq.(5 ), we deﬁne the adversarial loss by
Ladv(θ) =−1
NN/summationdisplay
n=1logp(yn|sn+radv,n;θ) (6)
whereNis the number of labeled examples. In our experiments, adver sarial training refers to
minimizing the negative log-likelihood plus Ladvwith stochastic gradient descent.
In virtual adversarial training on our text classiﬁcation m odel, at each training step, we calculate the
below approximated virtual adversarial perturbation:
rv-adv=ǫg//ba∇dblg/ba∇dbl2whereg=∇s+dKL/bracketleftBig
p(· |s;ˆθ)||p(· |s+d;ˆθ)/bracketrightBig
(7)
3Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
wheredis aTD-dimensional small random vector. This approximation corr esponds to a 2nd-
order Taylor expansion and a single iteration of the power me thod on Eq.(3) as in previous
work (Miyato et al., 2016). Then the virtual adversarial los s is deﬁned as:
Lv-adv(θ) =1
N′N′/summationdisplay
n′=1KL/bracketleftBig
p(· |sn′;ˆθ)||p(· |sn′+rv-adv,n′;θ)/bracketrightBig
(8)
whereN′is the number of both labeled and unlabeled examples.
See Warde-Farley & Goodfellow (2016) for a recent review of a dversarial training methods.
4 E XPERIMENTAL SETTINGS
All experiments used TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016) on GPUs . To compare our method with other
text classiﬁcation methods, we tested on 5 different text da tasets. We summarize information about
each dataset in Table 1.
IMDB (Maas et al., 2011)1is a standard benchmark movie review dataset for sentiment c lassiﬁca-
tion. Elec (Johnson & Zhang, 2015b)2 3is an Amazon electronic product review dataset. Rotten
Tomatoes (Pang & Lee, 2005) consists of short snippets of mov ie reviews, for sentiment classiﬁ-
cation. The Rotten Tomatoes dataset does not come with separ ate test sets, thus we divided all
examples randomly into 90% for the training set, and 10% for t he test set. We repeated train-
ing and evaluation ﬁve times with different random seeds for the division. For the Rotten Toma-
toes dataset, we also collected unlabeled examples using mo vie reviews from the Amazon Re-
views dataset (McAuley & Leskovec, 2013)4. DBpedia (Lehmann et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015)
is a dataset of Wikipedia pages for category classiﬁcation. Because the DBpedia dataset has no
additional unlabeled examples, the results on DBpedia are f or the supervised learning task only.
RCV1 (Lewis et al., 2004) consists of news articles from the R euters Corpus. For the RCV1 dataset,
we followed previous works (Johnson & Zhang, 2015b) and we co nducted a single topic classiﬁca-
tion task on the second level topics. We used the same divisio n into training, test and unlabeled
sets as Johnson & Zhang (2015b). Regarding pre-processing, we treated any punctuation as spaces.
We converted all words to lower-case on the Rotten Tomatoes, DBpedia, and RCV1 datasets. We
removed words which appear in only one document on all datase ts. On RCV1, we also removed
words in the English stop-words list provided by Lewis et al. (2004)5.
Table 1: Summary of datasets. Note that unlabeled examples f or the Rotten Tomatoes dataset are
not provided so we instead use the unlabeled Amazon reviews d ataset.
Classes Train Test Unlabeled Avg. T MaxT
IMDB 2 25,000 25,000 50,000 239 2,506
Elec 2 24,792 24,897 197,025 110 5,123
Rotten Tomatoes 2 9596 1066 7,911,684 20 54
DBpedia 14 560,000 70,000 – 49 953
RCV1 55 15,564 49,838 668,640 153 9,852
4.1 R ECURRENT LANGUAGE MODEL PRE -TRAINING
Following Dai & Le (2015), we initialized the word embedding matrix and LSTM weights with a
pre-trained recurrent language model (Bengio et al., 2006; Mikolov et al., 2010) that was trained on
1http://ai.stanford.edu/~amaas/data/sentiment/
2http://riejohnson.com/cnn_data.html
3There are some duplicated reviews in the original Elec datas et, and we used the dataset with removal of
the duplicated reviews, provided by Johnson & Zhang (2015b) , thus there are slightly fewer examples shown
in Table 1 than the ones in previous works(Johnson & Zhang, 20 15b; 2016b).
4http://snap.stanford.edu/data/web-Amazon.html
5http://www.ai.mit.edu/projects/jmlr/papers/volume5/ lewis04a/lyrl2004_rcv1v2_README.htm
4Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
both labeled and unlabeled examples. We used a unidirection al single-layer LSTM with 1024 hidden
units. The word embedding dimension Dwas 256 on IMDB and 512 on the other datasets. We used
a sampled softmax loss with 1024 candidate samples for train ing. For the optimization, we used the
Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015), with batch size 256, an in itial learning rate of 0.001, and
a 0.9999 learning rate exponential decay factor at each trai ning step. We trained for 100,000 steps.
We applied gradient clipping with norm set to 1.0 on all the pa rameters except word embeddings. To
reduce runtime on GPU, we used truncated backpropagation up to 400 words from each end of the
sequence. For regularization of the recurrent language mod el, we applied dropout (Srivastava et al.,
2014) on the word embedding layer with 0.5 dropout rate.
For the bidirectional LSTM model, we used 512 hidden units LS TM for both the standard order and
reversed order sequences, and we used 256 dimensional word e mbeddings which are shared with
both of the LSTMs. The other hyperparameters are the same as f or the unidirectional LSTM. We
tested the bidirectional LSTM model on IMDB, Elec and RCV bec ause there are relatively long
sentences in the datasets.
Pretraining with a recurrent language model was very effect ive on classiﬁcation performance on all
the datasets we tested on and so our results in Section 5 are wi th this pretraining.
4.2 T RAINING CLASSIFICATION MODELS
After pre-training, we trained the text classiﬁcation mode l shown in Figure 1a with adversarial and
virtual adversarial training as described in Section 3. Bet ween the softmax layer for the target yand
the ﬁnal output of the LSTM, we added a hidden layer, which has dimension 30 on IMDB, Elec
and Rotten Tomatoes, and 128 on DBpedia and RCV1. The activat ion function on the hidden layer
was ReLU(Jarrett et al., 2009; Nair & Hinton, 2010; Glorot et al., 2011). For optimization, we again
used the Adam optimizer, with 0.0005 initial learning rate 0 .9998 exponential decay. Batch sizes
are 64 on IMDB, Elec, RCV1, and 128 on DBpedia. For the Rotten T omatoes dataset, for each
step, we take a batch of size 64 for calculating the loss of the negative log-likelihood and adversarial
training, and 512 for calculating the loss of virtual advers arial training. Also for Rotten Tomatoes,
we used texts with lengths Tless than 25 in the unlabeled dataset. We iterated 10,000 tra ining steps
on all datasets except IMDB and DBpedia, for which we used 15, 000 and 20,000 training steps
respectively. We again applied gradient clipping with the n orm as 1.0 on all the parameters except
the word embedding. We also used truncated backpropagation up to 400 words, and also generated
the adversarial and virtual adversarial perturbation up to 400 words from each end of the sequence.
We found the bidirectional LSTM to converge more slowly, so w e iterated for 15,000 training steps
when training the bidirectional LSTM classiﬁcation model.
For each dataset, we divided the original training set into t raining set and validation set, and we
roughly optimized some hyperparameters shared with all of t he methods; (model architecture, batch-
size, training steps) with the validation performance of th e base model with embedding dropout. For
each method, we optimized two scalar hyperparameters with t he validation set. These were the
dropout rate on the embeddings and the norm constraint ǫof adversarial and virtual adversarial
training. Note that for adversarial and virtual adversaria l training, we generate the perturbation after
applying embedding dropout, which we found performed the be st. We did not do early stopping with
these methods. The method with only pretraining and embeddi ng dropout is used as the baseline
(referred to as Baseline in each table).
5 R ESULTS
5.1 T EST PERFORMANCE ON IMDB DATASET AND MODEL ANALYSIS
Figure 2 shows the learning curves on the IMDB test set with th e baseline method (only embedding
dropout and pretraining), adversarial training, and virtu al adversarial training. We can see in Fig-
ure 2a that adversarial and virtual adversarial training ac hieved lower negative log likelihood than
the baseline. Furthermore, virtual adversarial training, which can utilize unlabeled data, maintained
this low negative log-likelihood while the other methods be gan to overﬁt later in training. Regarding
adversarial and virtual adversarial loss in Figure 2b and 2c , we can see the same tendency as for
negative log likelihood; virtual adversarial training was able to keep these values lower than other
5Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
methods. Because adversarial training operates only on the labeled subset of the training data, it
eventually overﬁts even the task of resisting adversarial p erturbations.
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Step0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.7T est negative log likelihoodBaseline
Adversarial
Virtual adversarial
(a) Negative log likelihood0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Step0.00.51.01.52.02.5T est adversarial lossBaseline
Adversarial
Virtual adversarial
(b)Ladv(θ)0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Step0.00.20.40.60.81.0T est virtual adversarial lossBaseline
Adversarial
Virtual adversarial
(c)Lv-adv(θ)
Figure 2: Learning curves of (a) negative log likelihood, (b ) adversarial loss (deﬁned in Eq.(6))
and (c) virtual adversarial loss (deﬁned in Eq.(8)) on IMDB. All values were evaluated on the test
set. Adversarial and virtual adversarial loss were evaluat ed withǫ= 5.0. The optimal value of ǫ
differs between adversarial training and virtual adversar ial training, but the value of 5.0performs
very well for both and provides a consistent point of compari son.
Table 2 shows the test performance on IMDB with each training method. ‘Adversarial + Virtual Ad-
versarial’ means the method with both adversarial and virtu al adversarial loss with the shared norm
constraint ǫ. With only embedding dropout, our model achieved a 7.39% err or rate. Adversarial and
virtual adversarial training improved the performance rel ative to our baseline, and virtual adversarial
training achieved performance on par with the state of the ar t, 5.91% error rate. This is despite the
fact that the state of the art model requires training a bidir ectional LSTM whereas our model only
uses a unidirectional LSTM. We also show results with a bidir ectional LSTM. Our bidirectional
LSTM model has the same performance as a unidirectional LSTM with virtual adversarial training.
A common misconception is that adversarial training is equi valent to training on noisy examples.
Noise is actually a far weaker regularizer than adversarial perturbations because, in high dimensional
input spaces, an average noise vector is approximately orth ogonal to the cost gradient. Adversarial
perturbations are explicitly chosen to consistently incre ase the cost. To demonstrate the superiority
of adversarial training over the addition of noise, we inclu de control experiments which replaced
adversarial perturbations with random perturbations from a multivariate Gaussian with scaled norm,
on each embedding in the sequence. In Table 2, ‘Random pertur bation with labeled examples’ is the
method in which we replace radvwith random perturbations, and ‘Random perturbation with l abeled
and unlabeled examples’ is the method in which we replace rv-advwith random perturbations. Every
adversarial training method outperformed every random per turbation method.
To visualize the effect of adversarial and virtual adversar ial training on embeddings, we examined
embeddings trained using each method. Table 3 shows the 10 to p nearest neighbors to ‘good’ and
‘bad’ with trained embeddings. The baseline and random meth ods are both strongly inﬂuenced
by the grammatical structure of language, due to the languag e model pretraining step, but are not
strongly inﬂuenced by the semantics of the text classiﬁcati on task. For example, ‘bad’ appears in the
list of nearest neighbors to ‘good’ on the baseline and the ra ndom perturbation method. Both ‘bad’
and ‘good’ are adjectives that can modify the same set of noun s, so it is reasonable for a language
model to assign them similar embeddings, but this clearly do es not convey much information about
the actual meaning of the words. Adversarial training ensur es that the meaning of a sentence cannot
be inverted via a small change, so these words with similar gr ammatical role but different meaning
become separated. When using adversarial and virtual adver sarial training, ‘bad’ no longer appears
in the 10 top nearest neighbors to ‘good’. ‘bad’ falls to the 1 9th nearest neighbor for adversarial
training and 21st nearest neighbor for virtual adversarial training, with cosine distances of 0.463 and
0.464, respectively. For the baseline and random perturbat ion method, the cosine distances were
0.361 and 0.377, respectively. In the other direction, the n earest neighbors to ‘bad’ included ‘good’
as the 4th nearest neighbor for the baseline method and rando m perturbation method. For both
adversarial methods, ‘good’ drops to the 36th nearest neigh bor of ‘bad‘.
We also investigated the 15 nearest neighbors to ‘great’ and its cosine distances with the trained
embeddings. We saw that cosine distance on adversarial and v irtual adversarial training (0.159–
0.331) were much smaller than ones on the baseline and random perturbation method (0.244–0.399).
6Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
Table 2: Test performance on the IMDB sentiment classiﬁcati on task. * indicates using pretrained
embeddings of CNN and bidirectional LSTM.
Method Test error rate
Baseline (without embedding normalization) 7.33%
Baseline 7.39%
Random perturbation with labeled examples 7.20%
Random perturbation with labeled and unlabeled examples 6. 78%
Adversarial 6.21%
Virtual Adversarial 5.91%
Adversarial + Virtual Adversarial 6.09%
Virtual Adversarial (on bidirectional LSTM) 5.91%
Adversarial + Virtual Adversarial (on bidirectional LSTM) 6.02%
Full+Unlabeled+BoW (Maas et al., 2011) 11.11%
Transductive SVM (Johnson & Zhang, 2015b) 9.99%
NBSVM-bigrams (Wang & Manning, 2012) 8.78%
Paragraph Vectors (Le & Mikolov, 2014) 7.42%
SA-LSTM (Dai & Le, 2015) 7.24%
One-hot bi-LSTM* (Johnson & Zhang, 2016b) 5.94%
Table 3: 10 top nearest neighbors to ‘good’ and ‘bad’ with the word embeddings trained on each
method. We used cosine distance for the metric. ‘Baseline’ m eans training with embedding dropout
and ‘Random’ means training with random perturbation with l abeled examples. ‘Adversarial’ and
‘Virtual Adversarial’ mean adversarial training and virtu al adversarial training.
‘good ’ ‘bad’
Baseline Random Adversarial Virtual
AdversarialBaseline Random Adversarial Virtual
Adversarial
1 great great decent decent terrible terrible terrible terr ible
2 decent decent great great awful awful awful awful
3×bad excellent nice nice horrible horrible horrible horrible
4 excellent nice ﬁne ﬁne ×good ×good poor poor
5 Good Good entertaining entertaining Bad poor BAD BAD
6 ﬁne ×bad interesting interesting BAD BAD stupid stupid
7 nice ﬁne Good Good poor Bad Bad Bad
8 interesting interesting excellent cool stupid stupid lau ghable laughable
9 solid entertaining solid enjoyable Horrible Horrible lam e lame
10 entertaining solid cool excellent horrendous horrendou s Horrible Horrible
The much weaker positive word ‘good’ also moved from the 3rd n earest neighbor to the 15th after
virtual adversarial training.
5.2 T EST PERFORMANCE ON ELEC, RCV1 AND ROTTEN TOMATOES DATASET
Table 4 shows the test performance on the Elec and RCV1 datase ts. We can see our proposed method
improved test performance on the baseline method and achiev ed state of the art performance on both
datasets, even though the state of the art method uses a combi nation of CNN and bidirectional LSTM
models. Our unidirectional LSTM model improves on the state of the art method and our method
with a bidirectional LSTM further improves results on RCV1. The reason why the bidirectional
models have better performance on the RCV1 dataset would be t hat, on the RCV1 dataset, there are
some very long sentences compared with the other datasets, a nd the bidirectional model could better
handle such long sentences with the shorter dependencies fr om the reverse order sentences.
Table 5 shows test performance on the Rotten Tomatoes datase t. Adversarial training was able to
improve over the baseline method, and with both adversarial and virtual adversarial cost, achieved
almost the same performance as the current state of the art me thod. However the test performance
of only virtual adversarial training was worse than the base line. We speculate that this is because
the Rotten Tomatoes dataset has very few labeled sentences a nd the labeled sentences are very short.
7Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
Table 4: Test performance on the Elec and RCV1 classiﬁcation tasks. * indicates using pretrained
embeddings of CNN, and†indicates using pretrained embeddings of CNN and bidirecti onal LSTM.
Method Test error rate
Elec RCV1
Baseline 6.24% 7.40%
Adversarial 5.61% 7.12%
Virtual Adversarial 5.54% 7.05%
Adversarial + Virtual Adversarial 5.40% 6.97%
Virtual Adversarial (on bidirectional LSTM) 5.55% 6.71%
Adversarial + Virtual Adversarial (on bidirectional LSTM) 5.45% 6.68%
Transductive SVM (Johnson & Zhang, 2015b) 16.41% 10.77%
NBLM (Naıve Bayes logisitic regression model) (Johnson & Zh ang, 2015a) 8.11% 13.97%
One-hot CNN* (Johnson & Zhang, 2015b) 6.27% 7.71%
One-hot CNN†(Johnson & Zhang, 2016b) 5.87% 7.15%
One-hot bi-LSTM†(Johnson & Zhang, 2016b) 5.55% 8.52%
In this case, the virtual adversarial loss on unlabeled exam ples overwhelmed the supervised loss, so
the model prioritized being robust to perturbation rather t han obtaining the correct answer.
Table 5: Test performance on the Rotten Tomatoes sentiment c lassiﬁcation task. * indicates using
pretrained embeddings from word2vec Google News, and†indicates using unlabeled data from
Amazon reviews.
Method Test error rate
Baseline 17.9%
Adversarial 16.8%
Virtual Adversarial 19.1%
Adversarial + Virtual Adversarial 16.6%
NBSVM-bigrams(Wang & Manning, 2012) 20.6%
CNN*(Kim, 2014) 18.5%
AdaSent*(Zhao et al., 2015) 16.9%
SA-LSTM†(Dai & Le, 2015) 16.7%
5.3 P ERFORMANCE ON THE DBPEDIA PURELY SUPERVISED CLASSIFICATION TASK
Table 6 shows the test performance of each method on DBpedia. The ‘Random perturbation’ is
the same method as the ‘Random perturbation with labeled exa mples’ explained in Section 5.1.
Note that DBpedia has only labeled examples, as we explained in Section 4, so this task is purely
supervised learning. We can see that the baseline method has already achieved nearly the current
state of the art performance, and our proposed method improv es from the baseline method.
6 R ELATED WORKS
Dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) is a regularization metho d widely used for many domains includ-
ing text. There are some previous works adding random noise t o the input and hidden layer during
training, to prevent overﬁtting (e.g. (Sietsma & Dow, 1991; Poole et al., 2013)). However, in our
experiments and in previous works (Miyato et al., 2016), tra ining with adversarial and virtual adver-
sarial perturbations outperformed the method with random p erturbations.
For semi-supervised learning with neural networks, a commo n approach, especially in the image
domain, is to train a generative model whose latent features may be used as features for classiﬁ-
cation (e.g. (Hinton et al., 2006; Maaløe et al., 2016)). The se models now achieve state of the art
8Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
Table 6: Test performance on the DBpedia topic classiﬁcatio n task
Method Test error rate
Baseline (without embedding normalization) 0.87%
Baseline 0.90%
Random perturbation 0.85%
Adversarial 0.79%
Virtual Adversarial 0.76%
Bag-of-words(Zhang et al., 2015) 3.57%
Large-CNN(character-level) (Zhang et al., 2015) 1.73%
SA-LSTM(word-level)(Dai & Le, 2015) 1.41%
N-grams TFIDF (Zhang et al., 2015) 1.31%
SA-LSTM(character-level)(Dai & Le, 2015) 1.19%
Word CNN (Johnson & Zhang, 2016a) 0.84%
performance on the image domain. However, these methods req uire numerous additional hyperpa-
rameters with generative models, and the conditions under w hich the generative model will provide
good supervised learning performance are poorly understoo d. By comparison, adversarial and vir-
tual adversarial training requires only one hyperparamete r, and has a straightforward interpretation
as robust optimization.
Adversarial and virtual adversarial training resemble som e semi-supervised or transductive SVM ap-
proaches (Joachims, 1999; Chapelle & Zien, 2005; Collobert et al., 2006; Belkin et al., 2006) in that
both families of methods push the decision boundary far from training examples (or in the case of
transductive SVMs, test examples). However, adversarial t raining methods insist on margins on the
input space , while SVMs insist on margins on the feature spac e deﬁned by the kernel function. This
property allows adversarial training methods to achieve th e models with a more ﬂexible function on
the space where the margins are imposed. In our experiments ( Table 2, 4) and Miyato et al. (2016),
adversarial and virtual adversarial training achieve bett er performance than SVM based methods.
There has also been semi-supervised approaches applied to t ext classiﬁcation with both CNNs and
RNNs. These approaches utilize ‘view-embeddings’(Johnso n & Zhang, 2015b; 2016b) which use
the window around a word to generate its embedding. When thes e are used as a pretrained model for
the classiﬁcation model, they are found to improve generali zation performance. These methods and
our method are complementary as we showed that our method imp roved from a recurrent pretrained
language model.
7 C ONCLUSION
In our experiments, we found that adversarial and virtual ad versarial training have good regular-
ization performance in sequence models on text classiﬁcati on tasks. On all datasets, our proposed
method exceeded or was on par with the state of the art perform ance. We also found that adversarial
and virtual adversarial training improved not only classiﬁ cation performance but also the quality of
word embeddings. These results suggest that our proposed me thod is promising for other text do-
main tasks, such as machine translation(Sutskever et al., 2 014), learning distributed representations
of words or paragraphs(Mikolov et al., 2013; Le & Mikolov, 20 14) and question answering tasks.
Our approach could also be used for other general sequential tasks, such as for video or speech.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the developers of Tensorﬂow. We thank the members of Google Brain team for their warm
support and valuable comments. This work is partly supporte d by NEDO.
REFERENCES
Martın Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Z hifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S Corrado,
Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, et al. Tensorﬂow: Large-scale machine learning on heteroge-
9Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
neous distributed systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.04467 , 2016.
Mikhail Belkin, Partha Niyogi, and Vikas Sindhwani. Manifo ld regularization: A geometric framework for
learning from labeled and unlabeled examples. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 7(Nov):2399–
2434, 2006.
Yoshua Bengio, Holger Schwenk, Jean-Sébastien Senécal, Fr éderic Morin, and Jean-Luc Gauvain. Neural
probabilistic language models. In Innovations in Machine Learning , pp. 137–186. Springer, 2006.
Olivier Chapelle and Alexander Zien. Semi-supervised clas siﬁcation by low density separation. In AISTATS ,
2005.
Ronan Collobert, Fabian Sinz, Jason Weston, and Léon Bottou . Large scale transductive svms. Journal of
Machine Learning Research , 7(Aug):1687–1712, 2006.
Andrew M Dai and Quoc V Le. Semi-supervised sequence learnin g. In NIPS , 2015.
Xavier Glorot, Antoine Bordes, and Yoshua Bengio. Deep spar se rectiﬁer neural networks. In AISTATS , 2011.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. E xplaining and harnessing adversarial examples.
InICLR , 2015.
Alex Graves and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Framewise phoneme clas siﬁcation with bidirectional lstm and other
neural network architectures. Neural Networks , 18(5):602–610, 2005.
Geoffrey E. Hinton, Simon Osindero, and Yee Whye Teh. A fast l earning algorithm for deep belief nets. Neural
Computation , 18:1527–1554, 2006.
Kevin Jarrett, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, a nd Yann LeCun. What is the best multi-stage
architecture for object recognition? In ICCV , 2009.
Thorsten Joachims. Transductive inference for text classi ﬁcation using support vector machines. In ICML ,
1999.
Rie Johnson and Tong Zhang. Effective use of word order for te xt categorization with convolutional neural
networks. NAACL HLT , 2015a.
Rie Johnson and Tong Zhang. Semi-supervised convolutional neural networks for text categorization via region
embedding. In NIPS , 2015b.
Rie Johnson and Tong Zhang. Convolutional neural networks f or text categorization: Shallow word-level vs.
deep character-level. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.00718 , 2016a.
Rie Johnson and Tong Zhang. Supervised and semi-supervised text categorization using LSTM for region
embeddings. In ICML , 2016b.
Yoon Kim. Convolutional neural networks for sentence class iﬁcation. In EMNLP , 2014.
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic o ptimization. In ICLR , 2015.
Quoc V Le and Tomas Mikolov. Distributed representations of sentences and documents. In ICML , 2014.
Jens Lehmann, Robert Isele, Max Jakob, Anja Jentzsch, Dimit ris Kontokostas, Pablo N Mendes, Sebastian
Hellmann, Mohamed Morsey, Patrick van Kleef, Sören Auer, et al. Dbpedia–a large-scale, multilingual
knowledge base extracted from wikipedia. Semantic Web , 6(2):167–195, 2015.
David D Lewis, Yiming Yang, Tony G Rose, and Fan Li. Rcv1: A new benchmark collection for text catego-
rization research. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 5:361–397, 2004.
Lars Maaløe, Casper Kaae Sønderby, Søren Kaae Sønderby, and Ole Winther. Auxiliary deep generative models.
InICML , 2016.
Andrew L Maas, Raymond E Daly, Peter T Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y Ng, and Christopher Potts. Learning
word vectors for sentiment analysis. In ACL: Human Language Technologies-Volume 1 , 2011.
Julian McAuley and Jure Leskovec. Hidden factors and hidden topics: understanding rating dimensions with
review text. In ACM conference on Recommender systems , 2013.
Tomas Mikolov, Martin Karaﬁát, Lukas Burget, Jan Cernock `y, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. Recurrent neural
network based language model. In INTERSPEECH , 2010.
10Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean. Distributed representations of words
and phrases and their compositionality. In NIPS , 2013.
Takeru Miyato, Shin-ichi Maeda, Masanori Koyama, Ken Nakae , and Shin Ishii. Distributional smoothing with
virtual adversarial training. In ICLR , 2016.
Vinod Nair and Geoffrey E Hinton. Rectiﬁed linear units impr ove restricted boltzmann machines. In ICML ,
2010.
Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. Seeing stars: Exploiting class rela tionships for sentiment categorization with respect
to rating scales. In ACL, 2005.
Ben Poole, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Surya Ganguli. Analy zing noise in autoencoders and deep networks. In
Deep Leanring Workshop on NIPS , 2013.
J. Sietsma and R. Dow. Creating artiﬁcial neural networks th at generalize. Neural Networks , 4(1), 1991.
Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Dropout: A
simple way to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 15(1),
2014.
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. Sequence to seq uence learning with neural networks. In NIPS ,
2014.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow, and Rob
Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. In ICLR , 2014.
Sida Wang and Christopher D Manning. Baselines and bigrams: Simple, good sentiment and topic classiﬁcation.
InACL: Short Papers , 2012.
David Warde-Farley and Ian Goodfellow. Adversarial pertur bations of deep neural networks. In Tamir Hazan,
George Papandreou, and Daniel Tarlow (eds.), Perturbations, Optimization, and Statistics , chapter 11. 2016.
Book in preparation for MIT Press.
Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. Character-level co nvolutional networks for text classiﬁcation. In
NIPS , 2015.
Han Zhao, Zhengdong Lu, and Pascal Poupart. Self-adaptive h ierarchical sentence model. In IJCAI , 2015.
11