Domain Randomization and Generative Models for Robotic Grasping
Josh Tobin12, Lukas Biewald3, Rocky Duan4, Marcin Andrychowicz1, Ankur Handa5, Vikash Kumar2,
Bob McGrew1, Alex Ray1, Jonas Schneider1, Peter Welinder1, Wojciech Zaremba1y, Pieter Abbeel24y
Fig. 1. An overview of our approach. Since creating large numbers of realistic object models is challenging, we train our deep autoregressive model
architecture on millions of unrealistic procedurally generated objects (indicated in blue above) and billions of unique grasp attempts. At test time, our
model generalizes to realistic objects from the YCB dataset (indicated in green above) [4] with 92% success rate.
Abstract — Deep learning-based robotic grasping has made
signiﬁcant progress thanks to algorithmic improvements and
increased data availability. However, state-of-the-art models
are often trained on as few as hundreds or thousands of
unique object instances, and as a result generalization can be
a challenge.
In this work, we explore a novel data generation pipeline for
training a deep neural network to perform grasp planning that
applies the idea of domain randomization to object synthesis. We
generate millions of unique, unrealistic procedurally generated
objects, and train a deep neural network to perform grasp
planning on these objects.
Since the distribution of successful grasps for a given object
can be highly multimodal, we propose an autoregressive grasp
planning model that maps sensor inputs of a scene to a
probability distribution over possible grasps. This model allows
us to sample grasps efﬁciently at test time (or avoid sampling
entirely).
We evaluate our model architecture and data generation
pipeline in simulation and the real world. We ﬁnd we can
achieve a >90% success rate on previously unseen realistic
objects at test time in simulation despite having only been
trained on random objects. We also demonstrate an 80%
success rate on real-world grasp attempts despite having only
been trained on random simulated objects.
I. INTRODUCTION
Robotic grasping remains one of the core unsolved prob-
lems in manipulation. The earliest robotic grasping methods
used analytical knowledge of a scene to compute an optimal
1OpenAI2UC Berkeley3Weights and Biases, Inc
4Embodied Intelligence5NVIDIA
Work done while at OpenAIyEqual advising
Correspondence to josh@openai.comgrasp for an object [1], [31], [32], [38], [39], [45]. Assuming
a contact model and a heuristic for the likelihood of success
of a grasp, analytical methods can provide guarantees about
grasp quality, but they often fail in the real world due to
inconsistencies in the simpliﬁed object and contact models,
the need for accurate 3D models of the objects in question,
and sensor inaccuracies [2].
As a result, signiﬁcant research attention has been given
to data-driven grasp synthesis methods [2], [8], [27]–[29],
[35], [43]. These algorithms avoid some of the challenges of
analytic methods by sampling potential grasps and ranking
them according to a learned function that maps sensor inputs
to an estimate of a chosen heuristic.
Recently, several works have explored using deep neural
networks to approximate the grasp heuristic function [14],
[23], [24], [36]. The promise of deep neural networks for
learning grasp heuristics is that with diverse training data,
deep models can learn features that deal with the edge cases
that make real-world grasping challenging.
A core challenge for deep learning grasp quality heuristics
is data availability. Due to the difﬁculty and expense of
collecting real-world data and due to the limited availability
of high-quality 3D object meshes, current approaches use
as few as hundreds or thousands of unique object instances,
which may limit generalization. In contrast, ImageNet [18],
the standard benchmark for image classiﬁcation, has about
15M unique images from 22K categories.
In order to increase the availability of training data in
simulation, we explore applying the idea of domain ran-
domization [41], [46] to the creation of 3D object meshes.arXiv:1710.06425v2  [cs.RO]  3 Apr 2018Domain randomization is a technique for learning models
that work in a test domain after only training on low-ﬁdelity
simulated data by randomizing all non-essential aspects of
the simulator. One of the core hypotheses of this work is
that by training on a wide enough variety of unrealistic
procedurally generated object meshes, our learned models
will generalize to realistic objects.
Previous work in deep learning for grasping has focused
on learning a function that estimates the quality of a given
grasp given observations of the scene. Choosing grasps on
which to perform this estimate has received comparatively
little attention. Grasps are typically chosen using random
sampling or by solving a small optimization problem online.
The second goal of this paper is to propose a deep learning-
based method for choosing grasps to evaluate. Our hypothe-
sis is that a learned model for grasp sampling will be more
likely to ﬁnd high-quality grasps for challenging objects and
will do so more efﬁciently.
We use an autoregressive model architecture [20], [33],
[34] that maps sensor inputs to a probability distribution over
grasps that corresponds to the model’s weighted estimate
of the likelihood of success of each grasp. After training,
highest probability grasp according to the distribution suc-
ceeds on 89% of test objects and the 20 highest probability
grasps contain a successful grasp for 96% of test objects. In
order to determine which grasp to execute on the robot, we
collect a second observation in the form of an image from
the robot’s hand camera and train a second model to choose
the most promising grasp among those sampled from the
autoregressive model, resulting in a success rate of 92%.
The contributions of this paper can be summarized as
follows:
We explore the effect of training a model for grasping
using unrealistic procedurally generated objects and
show that such a model can achieve similar success to
one trained on a realistic object distribution. (Another
paper [3] developed concurrently to this one explored a
similar idea and reached similar conclusions.)
We propose a novel generative model architecture and
training methodology for learning a sampling distribu-
tion for grasps to evaluate.
We evaluate our object generation, training, and sam-
pling algorithms in simulated scenes and ﬁnd that we
can achieve an 84% success rate on random objects
and 92% success rate on previously unseen real-world
objects despite training only on non-realistic randomly
generated objects.
We demonstrate that we can deploy these models in
real-world grasping experiments with an 80% success
rate despite having been trained entirely in simulation.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Domain Randomization
Domain randomization involves randomizing non-essential
aspects of the training distribution in order to better gener-
alize to a difﬁcult-to-model test distribution. This idea hasbeen employed in robotics since at least 1997, when Jakobi
proposed the “Radical Envelope of Noise Hypothesis”, the
idea that evolved controllers can be made more robust by
completely randomizing all aspects of the simulator that
do not have a basis in reality and slightly randomizing
all aspects of the simulator that do have a basis in reality
[13]. Recently domain randomization has shown promise in
transferring deep neural networks for robotics tasks from
simulation to the real world by randomizing physics [30]
and appearance properties [41], [46], [54].
In another work developed concurrently with this one [3],
the authors reach a similar conclusion about the utility of
procedurally generated objects for the purpose of robotic
grasping. In contrast to this work, theirs focuses on how
to combine simulated data with real grasping data to achieve
successful transfer to the real world, but does not focus
on achieving a high overall success rate. Our paper instead
focuses on how to achieve the best possible generalization to
novel objects. Ours also has a comparable real-world success
rate despite not using any real-world training data.
B. Autoregressive models
This paper uses an autoregressive architecture to model a
distribution over grasps conditioned on observations of an
object. Autoregressive models leverage the fact that an N-
dimensional probability distribution p(X)can be factored asQN
n=1p(xnjx1;;xn 1)for any choice of ordering of
1-dimensional variables xi. The task of modeling the distri-
bution then consists of modeling each p(xnjx1;;xn 1)
[20]. In contrast to Generative Adversarial Networks [9],
another popular form for a deep generative model, au-
toregressive models can directly compute the likelihood of
samples, which is advantageous for tasks like grasping in
which ﬁnding the highest likelihood samples is important.
Autoregressive models have been used for density estimation
and generative modeling in image domains [7], [10], [20] and
have been shown to perform favorably on challenging image
datasets like ImageNet [34], [48]. Autoregressive models
have also been successfully applied to other forms of data
including in topic modeling [19] and audio generation [33].
C. Robotic grasping
Grasp planning methods fall into one of two categories:
analytical methods and empirical methods [42].
Analytical methods use a contact model and knowledge
of an object’s 3D shape to ﬁnd grasps that maximize a
chosen metric like the ability of the grasp to resist external
wrenches [38] or constrain the object’s motion [39]. Some
methods attempt to make these estimates more robust to
gripper and object pose uncertainty and sensor error by
instead maximizing the expected value of a metric under
uncertainty [15], [50].
Most approaches use simpliﬁed Coulomb friction and rigid
body modeling for computational tractability [31], [38], but
some have explored more realistic object and friction models
[1], [37], [40]. Typically, grasps for an object are selected
based on sensor data by registering images to a knowndatabase of 3D models using a traditional computer vision
pipeline [6], [12], [51] or a deep neural network [11], [53].
Empirical methods instead attempt to maximize the value
of a quality metric through sampling [42]. Many approaches
use simulation to evaluate classical grasp quality metrics [8],
[26], [27], [35]. Others use human labeling or self-supervised
learning to measure success [28], [29], [43].
Most techniques estimate the value of the quality metric
in real-world trials using traditional computer vision and
learning techniques [21], [35], [43], [44]. More recently, deep
learning has been employed to learn a mapping directly from
sensor observations to grasp quality or motor torques.
D. Deep learning for robotic grasping
Work in deep learning for grasping can be categorized by
how training data is collected and how the model transforms
noisy observations into grasp candidates.
Some approaches use hand-annotated real-world grasping
trials to provide training labels [22]. However, hand-labeling
is challenging to scale to large datasets. To alleviate this
problem, some work explores automated large-scale data
collection [23], [36]. Others have explored replacing real
data with synthetic depth data at training time [14], [24],
[25], [49], or combining synthetic RGB images with real
images [3]. In many cases, simulated data appears to be
effective in replacing or supplementing real-world data in
robotic grasping. Unlike our approach, previous work using
synthetic data uses small datasets of up to a few thousand
of realistic object meshes.
One commonly used method for sampling grasps is to
learn a visuomotor control policy for the robot that allows
it to iteratively reﬁne its grasp target as it takes steps in
the environment. Levine and co-authors learn a prediction
networkg(It;vt)that takes an observation Itand motor
commandvtand outputs a predicted probability of a success-
ful grasp if vtis executed [23]. The cross-entropy method
is used to greedily select the vtthat maximizes g. Viereck
and co-authors instead learn a function d(It;vt)that maps
the current observation and an action to an estimate of the
distance to the nearest successful grasp after performing vt
[49]. Directions are sampled and a constant step size is taken
in the direction with the minimum value for d. In contrast to
visuomotor control strategies, planning approaches like ours
avoid the local optima of greedy execution.
Another strategy to choose a grasp using a deep learning is
to sample grasps and score them using a deep neural network
of the form f(I;g)!s, whereIare the observation(s)
of the scene, gis a selected grasp, and sis the score for
the selected grasp [14], [24], [25], [52]. These techniques
differ in terms of how they sample grasps to evaluate at
test time. Most commonly they directly optimize gusing the
cross-entropy method [24], [25], [52]. In contrast to these ap-
proaches, our approach jointly learns a grasp scoring function
and a sampling distribution, allowing for efﬁcient sampling
and avoiding exploitation by the optimization procedure of
under- or over-ﬁt regions of the grasp score function.Other approaches take a multi-step approach, starting with
a coarse representation of the possible grasps for an object
and then exhaustively searching using a learned heuristic [22]
or modeling the score function jointly for all possible coarse
grasps [14]. Once a coarse grasp is sampled, it is then ﬁne-
tuned using a separate network [22] or interpolation [14]. By
using an autoregressive model architecture, we are able to
directly learn a high- dimensional ( 204or206-dimensional)
multimodal probability distribution.
III. METHOD
Our goal is to learn a mapping that takes one or more
observations I=fIjgof a scene and outputs a grasp gto
attempt in the scene. The remainder of the section describes
the data generation pipeline, model architecture, and training
procedure used in our method.
A. Data collection
Fig. 3. Examples of objects used in our experiments. Left: procedurally
generated random objects. Middle: objects from the ShapeNet object dataset.
Right: objects from the YCB object dataset.
We will describe the process of generating training objects,
and then the process of sampling grasps for those objects.
1) Object generation: One of our core hypotheses is
that training on a diverse array of procedurally generated
objects can produce comparable performance to training on
realistic object meshes. Our procedurally generated objects
were formed as follows:
1) Sample a random number np2f1;15g
2) Samplenpprimitive meshes from our object primitive
dataset
3) Randomly scale each primitive so that all dimensions
are between 1 and 15cm
4) Place the meshes sequentially so that each mesh inter-
sects with at least one of the preceding meshes
5) Rescale the ﬁnal object to approximate the size distri-
bution observed in our real object dataset
To build a diverse object primitive dataset, we took the
more than 40,000 object meshes found in the ShapeNet
object dataset [5] and decomposed them into more than
400,000 convex parts using V-HACD1. Each primitive is one
convex part.
1https://github.com/kmammou/v-hacdWe compared this object generation procedure against a
baseline of training using rescaled ShapeNet objects.
2) Grasp sampling and evaluation: We sample grasps
uniformly at random from a discretized 4- or6-dimensional
grasp space ( 4-dimensional when attention is restricted to
upright grasps) corresponding to the (x;y;z )coordinates of
the center of the gripper and an orientation of the gripper
about that point. We discretize each dimension into 20
buckets. The buckets are the relative location of the grasp
point within the bounding box of the object – e.g., an x-
value of 0corresponds to a grasp at the far left side of the
object’s bounding box and a coordinate of 19corresponds to
a grasp at the far right.
Grasps that penetrate the object or for which the gripper
would not contact the object when closed can be instantly
rejected. The remainder are evaluated in a physics simulator.
For each grasp attempt, we also collect a depth image from
the robot’s hand camera during the approach to be used to
train the grasp evaluation function.
B. Model architecture
Fig. 4. An overview of sampling from our model architecture. Solid lines
represent neural networks, and dotted lines represent sampling operations.
The model takes as input one or more observations of the target object in
the form of depth images. The images are passed to an image representation
module, which maps the images to an embedding s. The embedding s
is the input for the autoregressive module , which outputs a distribution
over possible grasps gfor the object by modeling each dimension giof the
grasp conditioned on the previous dimensions. We sample khigh-likelihood
grasps~ g1;  ~ gkfrom the model using a beam search. For each of those
grasps, a second observation is captured that corresponds to an aligned
image in the plane of the potential grasp. A grasp scoring model fmaps
each aligned image to a score. The grasp with the highest score is selected
for execution on the robot.
The model architecture used for our experiments is out-
lined in Figure 4. The model consists of two separate neural
networks – a grasp planning module (I) =(I)and a
grasp evaluation model f. The grasp planning module is used
to sample grasps that are likely to be successful. The grasp
evaluation model takes advantage of more detailed data in
the form of a close-up image from a camera on the gripper of
the robot to form a more accurate estimate of the likelihood
of each sampled grasp to be successful.
The image representation s=(I)is formed by passing
each image through a separate convolutional neural network.The ﬂattened output of these convolutional layers are stacked
and passed through several dense layers to produce s.
The neural network (s)models a probability distribution
p(gjs)over possible grasps for the object that corresponds
to the normalized probability of success of each grasp.
The model consists ofnsubmodules iwherenis the
dimensionality of the grasp. For any grasp g,andfig
are related by
(s)(g) =nY
i=1i(g1;;gi 1;s);
wheregiare the dimensions of g.
Eachiis a small neural network taking sand
g1;;gi 1as input and outputting a softmax over the 20
possible values for gi, the next dimension of g. We found
that sharing weights between the ihurts performance at
convergence.
The grasp evaluation model ftakes as input a single
observation from the hand camera of the robot and outputs
a single scalar value corresponding to the likelihood of
success of that grasp. The model fis parameterized by a
convolutional neural network with sigmoid output.
C. Training methodology
Since our method involves capturing depth images from
the hand of the robot corresponding to samples from (I) =
(I), the entire evaluation procedure is not differentiable
and we cannot train the model end-to-end using supervised
learning. As a result, our training procedure involves inde-
pendently training andf.
Given datasets of objects D=fD1;Ddg, obser-
vationsI=fI1;Idgand successful grasps G=
fg1
1;g1
m1;g2
1;gd
mdg,can be optimized by min-
imizing the negative log-likelihood of Gconditioned on the
observations Iwith respect to the parameters of, which
is given by:
J() = 1
ddX
i=11
mimiX
j=1logp(gi
jjIi):
This can be decomposed as
 1
ddX
i=11
mimiX
j=1nX
k=1logk 
(Ii) 
(gi
l)l<k
:
This function can be optimized using standard backpropoga-
tion and minibatch SGD techniques. [20]
In practice, is usually a larger model than and there
are often tens or hundreds of successful grasp attempts fgi
jg
for a single observation Ii. Therefore it is computationally
advantageous to perform the forward pass and gradient
calculations for each (Ii)once for allfgi
jg.
This can be achieved in standard neural network and
backpropagation libraries by stacking all grasps for a given
object so that SGD minibatches consist of pairs (Ii;gi
fjg)
where gi
fjgis theminmatrix consisting of all successful
grasps for object i. To deal with differing values for mi,we choosem= max(fmig)and form an mnmatrix by
padding the minmatrix with arbitrary values. We can
then write the gradient rJ()of our objective function as
follows:
 1
ddX
i=11
mir(Ii)mX
j=11jnX
k=1rlogk 
(Ii) 
(gi
l)l<k
where 1jis an indicator function corresponding to whether
the entry in jwas one of the misuccessful grasps.
This form of the gradient allows us to compute r(Ii)
once for each Ii, which we found to increase training speed
by more than a factor of 10 in our experiments.
The grasp evaluation function fis trained using super-
vised learning. Inputs are the hand camera images collected
during the data collection process and labels are an indicator
function corresponding to whether the grasp was successful.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
The goal of our experiments is to answer the following
questions:
1) Can grasping models trained on unrealistic randomly
generated objects perform as well on novel realistic
objects as those trained on realistic objects?
2) How efﬁciently can we sample grasps from our pro-
posed autoregressive model architecture?
3) How important is using a large number of unique
objects for training grasping models?
4) How well do models trained using our methodology
work in the real world?
A. Experimental setup
We evaluated our approach by training grasping models
on three datasets:
ShapeNet-1M, a dataset of 1 Million scenes with a sin-
gle object from the ShapeNet dataset with randomized
orientation and object scale.
Random-1M, a dataset of 1 Million scenes with a single
object generated at random using the procedure above.
ShapeNet-Random-1M, a dataset with 500,000 scenes
from each of the previous datasets.
For each object set, we recorded 2,000 grasp attempts per
object. This number of grasps was selected so that more
than 95% of objects sampled had at least one successful
grasp to avoid biasing the dataset to easier objects2. For data
generation, we used a disembodied Fetch gripper to improve
execution speed.
We trained the models using the Adam optimizer [17]
with a learning rate of 10 4. We trained each model using
three random seeds, and report the average of the three seeds
unless otherwise noted.
We evaluated the model on 300 training and hold-out
scenes from ShapeNet-1M and Random-1M, as well as 300
scenes generated from the 75YCB objects with meshes
capable of being graseped by our robot’s gripper.
2This number is not closer to 100% because a small percentage of the
random objects in our training set are un-graspable with the Fetch gripper.All executions were done using a Fetch robot in the
MuJoCo physics simulator [47]. When evaluating the model,
we sampled k= 20 likely grasps from the model using a
beam search with beam width 20. Among these grasps, only
the one with the highest score according to fis attempted
on the robot. An attempt is considered successful if the robot
is able to use this grasp to lift the object by 30cm.
B. Performance using randomly generated training data
Figure 5 describes the overall success rate of the algorithm
on previously seen and unseen data. The full version of our
algorithm is able to achieve greater than 90% success rate on
previously unseen YCB objects even when training entirely
on randomly generated objects. Training on 1M random
objects performs comparably to training on 1M instances
of realistic objects.
ShapeNet ShapeNet Random Random
Training set Train Test Train Test Ycb
ShapeNet-1M 0.91 0.91 0.72 0.71 0.93
Random-1M 0.91 0.89 0.86 0.84 0.92
ShapeNet-Random-1M 0.92 0.90 0.84 0.81 0.92
Fig. 5. Performance of the algorithm on different synthetic test sets. The
full algorithm is able to achieve at least 90% success on previously unseen
objects from the YCB dataset when trained on any of the three training sets.
Note that these results were achieved by limiting the robot
to grasps in which the gripper is upright. The success rate
is around 10% lower across experiments when using full 6-
dimensional grasps. Further experimentation could look into
whether signiﬁcantly scaling the amount of training data or
using a combination of the 4-dimensional training data and
6-dimensional training data could improve performance.
Figure 6 compares the success rate of our algorithm to
several baselines. In particular, our full method performs
signiﬁcantly better than sampling the highest likelihood grasp
from the autoregressive model alone.
ShapeNet ShapeNet Random Random
Training set Train Test Train Test Ycb
Full Algorithm 0.91 0.89 0.86 0.84 0.92
Autoregressive-Only 0.89 0.86 0.80 0.76 0.89
Random 0.22 0.21 0.10 0.11 0.26
Centroid 0.30 0.25 0.10 0.12 0.54
Fig. 6. Performance of the algorithm compared to baseline approaches. The
Full Algorithm and Autoregressive-Only numbers reported are using models
trained on random data. The Autoregressive-Only baseline uses the model
to sample a single high-likelihood grasp, and executes that grasp directly
without evaluating it with the model f. The Random baseline samples a
random grasp. The centroid baseline deterministically attempts to grasps the
center of mass of the object, with the approach angle sampled randomly.
We observed the following three main failure cases for the
learned model:
1) For objects that are close to the maximum size gras-
pable by the gripper (10cm), the grasp chosen some-
times collides with the object.
2) In some cases, the model chooses to grasp a curved
object at a narrower point to avoid wider points that
may cause collision, causing the gripper to slip off.
3) The model cannot ﬁnd reasonable grasp candidates for
some highly irregular objects like a chain found in the
YCB dataset.Fig. 7. Examples of three observed failure cases for our learned models.
Left: the model chooses a grasp for an object that is close to the maximum
size of the gripper that collides with the object. Middle: the model chooses
a grasp for a large, highly curved object that causes it to slip off. Right: the
model fails to ﬁnd a promising grasp for a highly irregular object.
The learned models primarily failed on objects for which
all features are close in size to the maximum allowed by
the gripper. Supplementing the training set with additional
objects on the edge of graspability or combining planning
with visual servoing could alleviate these cases.
The model also failed for a small number of highly
irregular objects like a chain present in the YCB dataset.
These failure cases present a larger challenge for the use of
random objects in grasping, but additional diversity in the
random generation pipeline may mitigate the issue.
C. Efﬁciency of the autoregressive model
To test how efﬁciently we are able to sample grasps from
our autoregressive model, we looked at the percentage of
objects for which the top kmost likely grasps according to
contain at least one successful grasp. Figure 8 shows that
the most likely grasp according to the model succeeds close
to 90% of the time on YCB objects, and the incremental
likelihood of choosing a valid grasp saturates between 10
and20samples, motivating our choice of 20fork. Note
that more objects have successful grasps among the 20 sam-
pled than achieve success using our method, suggesting the
performance of the grasp evaluator fcould be a bottleneck
to the overall performance of the algorithm.
Fig. 8. Percentage of objects that a trained model can grasp successfully
as a function of number of the number of samples from the autoregressive
model attempted. Here, we sample the 20 grasps from the autoregressive
model that have the highest likelihood according to a beam search and count
the number of times success occurred on the nth attempt for n< 20.
D. Effect of amount of training data
Figure 9 shows the impact of the number of unique objects
in the training set on the performance of our models in
validation data held out from the same distribution and
out-of-sample test data from the YCB dataset. Although
with enough data the model trained entirely using randomly
generated data performs as well as the models trained usingrealistic data, with smaller training sets the more realistic
object distributions perform signiﬁcantly better on the test
set than does the unrealistic random object distribution.
Note that performance does not appear to have saturated
yet in these examples. We conjecture that more training data
and more training data diversity could help reduce the effects
of the ﬁrst two failure cases above, but may not allow the
model to overcome the third failure case.
Fig. 9. Impact of number of unique training objects used on the perfor-
mance of the learned model on held out data at test time. Each line represents
a different training set. The top chart indicates the performance of the models
on held out data from the same distribution (i.e., held out ShapeNet or
Random objects depending on the training set), and the bottom chart shows
performance on out-of-sample objects from the ShapeNet dataset.
E. Physical robot experiments
We evaluated the ability of models learned on synthetic
data using our method to transfer to the real world by
attempting to grasp objects from the YCB dataset with
a Fetch robot. Figure 10 shows the objects used in our
experiments. Models executed in the real-world were the
Autoregressive-Only variant of our method trained on the
Random-1M dataset with a single depth image from directly
above the scene as input. Figure 11 depicts typical grasp
executions on the Fetch robot during our experiments.
At test time, the depth input was produced by an Intel
RealSense D435 [16]. To model the noise in real-world depth
images, we followed the method of Mahler et al. [24], who
propose the observation model I=^I+, where ^Iis the
rendered depth image, is a Gamma random variable and
is a zero-mean Gaussian random variable.
We tested the learned model on 30 previously unseen
objects chosen to capture the diversity of the YCB object
dataset. We observed an overall success rate of 80% (24 /
30), which is comparable to the success rate reported on
novel objects in other recent papers applying deep learning
to parallel jaw robotic grasping [23], [24].
In addition to the failure modes described above, we saw
two additional failure modes in real-world experiments. The
ﬁrst was an inability to deal with highly translucent objects
like the clear lid in our object dataset. This likely results from
the inability of the RealSense to provide accurate readings forsuch objects. The second is objects with highly nonuniform
densities like the hammer in our dataset. One reason for
this failure is likely that our training data pipeline does not
generate objects with components of different densities.
A video of our real-world experiments is available on the
website for this paper.3
Fig. 10. The objects used in our real-world experiments.
Fig. 11. Typical grasp executions on the physical robot.
V. CONCLUSION
We demonstrated that a grasping model trained entirely us-
ing non-realistic procedurally generated objects can achieve
a high success rate on realistic objects despite no training on
a realistic objects. Our grasping model architecture allows
for efﬁcient sampling of high-likelihood grasps at evaluation
time, with a successful grasp being found for 96% of objects
in the ﬁrst 20 samples. By scoring those samples, we can
achieve an overall success rate of 92% on realistic objects on
the ﬁrst attempt. We also demonstrated that models learned
using our method can be transferred successfully to the real
world.
Future directions that could improve the success rate of
the trained models include scaling up to larger training
sets, providing the model with feedback from failed grasps
to inﬂuence further grasp selection, combining our grasp
3https://sites.google.com/openai.com/domainrandomization-
grasping/homeplanning module with work on visual servoing for grasping,
and incorporating additional sensor modalities like haptic
feedback.
Another exciting direction is to explore using domain
randomization for generalization in other robotic tasks. If
realistic object models are not needed, tasks like pick-and-
place, grasping in clutter, and tool use may beneﬁt from
the ability to randomly generate hundreds of thousands or
millions of 3D scenes.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Lukas Biewald and Rocky Duan for helpful
discussions, brainstorming, and support. The project could
not have happened without the help of Rachel Fong, Alex
Ray, Jonas Schneider, Peter Welinder, and the rest of the
engineering team at OpenAI.
REFERENCES
[1] Antonio Bicchi and Vijay Kumar. Robotic grasping and contact: A
review. In Robotics and Automation, 2000. Proceedings. ICRA’00.
IEEE International Conference on , volume 1, pages 348–353. IEEE,
2000.
[2] Jeannette Bohg, Antonio Morales, Tamim Asfour, and Danica Kragic.
Data-driven grasp synthesisa survey. IEEE Transactions on Robotics ,
30(2):289–309, 2014.
[3] Konstantinos Bousmalis, Alex Irpan, Paul Wohlhart, Yunfei Bai,
Matthew Kelcey, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Laura Downs, Julian Ibarz,
Peter Pastor, Kurt Konolige, et al. Using simulation and domain
adaptation to improve efﬁciency of deep robotic grasping. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1709.07857 , 2017.
[4] Berk Calli, Arjun Singh, Aaron Walsman, Siddhartha Srinivasa, Pieter
Abbeel, and Aaron M Dollar. The ycb object and model set: Towards
common benchmarks for manipulation research. In Advanced Robotics
(ICAR), 2015 International Conference on , pages 510–517. IEEE,
2015.
[5] Angel X Chang, Thomas Funkhouser, Leonidas Guibas, Pat Hanrahan,
Qixing Huang, Zimo Li, Silvio Savarese, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song,
Hao Su, et al. Shapenet: An information-rich 3d model repository.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03012 , 2015.
[6] Matei Ciocarlie, Kaijen Hsiao, Edward Gil Jones, Sachin Chitta,
Radu Bogdan Rusu, and Ioan A S ¸ucan. Towards reliable grasping and
manipulation in household environments. In Experimental Robotics ,
pages 241–252. Springer, 2014.
[7] Mathieu Germain, Karol Gregor, Iain Murray, and Hugo Larochelle.
Made: masked autoencoder for distribution estimation. In Proceedings
of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-
15), pages 881–889, 2015.
[8] Corey Goldfeder, Peter K Allen, Claire Lackner, and Raphael Pelossof.
Grasp planning via decomposition trees. In Robotics and Automation,
2007 IEEE International Conference on , pages 4679–4684. IEEE,
2007.
[9] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David
Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.
Generative adversarial nets. In Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes,
N. D. Lawrence, and K. Q. Weinberger, editors, Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 27 , pages 2672–2680. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc., 2014.
[10] Karol Gregor, Ivo Danihelka, Andriy Mnih, Charles Blundell, and
Daan Wierstra. Deep autoregressive networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1310.8499 , 2013.
[11] Saurabh Gupta, Pablo Arbel ´aez, Ross Girshick, and Jitendra Malik.
Aligning 3d models to rgb-d images of cluttered scenes. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pages 4731–4740, 2015.
[12] Stefan Hinterstoisser, Stefan Holzer, Cedric Cagniart, Slobodan Ilic,
Kurt Konolige, Nassir Navab, and Vincent Lepetit. Multimodal
templates for real-time detection of texture-less objects in heavily
cluttered scenes. In Computer Vision (ICCV), 2011 IEEE International
Conference on , pages 858–865. IEEE, 2011.[13] Nick Jakobi. Evolutionary robotics and the radical envelope-of-noise
hypothesis. Adaptive behavior , 6(2):325–368, 1997.
[14] Edward Johns, Stefan Leutenegger, and Andrew J Davison. Deep
learning a grasp function for grasping under gripper pose uncertainty.
InIntelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2016 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on , pages 4461–4468. IEEE, 2016.
[15] Ben Kehoe, Akihiro Matsukawa, Sal Candido, James Kuffner, and
Ken Goldberg. Cloud-based robot grasping with the google object
recognition engine. In Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2013 IEEE
International Conference on , pages 4263–4270. IEEE, 2013.
[16] Leonid Keselman, John Iselin Woodﬁll, Anders Grunnet-Jepsen, and
Achintya Bhowmik. Intel realsense stereoscopic depth cameras. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.05548 , 2017.
[17] Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 , 2014.
[18] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet
classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances
in neural information processing systems , pages 1097–1105, 2012.
[19] Hugo Larochelle and Stanislas Lauly. A neural autoregressive topic
model. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages
2708–2716, 2012.
[20] Hugo Larochelle and Iain Murray. The neural autoregressive dis-
tribution estimator. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 29–37, 2011.
[21] Quoc V Le, David Kamm, Arda F Kara, and Andrew Y Ng. Learning
to grasp objects with multiple contact points. In Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2010 IEEE International Conference on , pages
5062–5069. IEEE, 2010.
[22] Ian Lenz, Honglak Lee, and Ashutosh Saxena. Deep learning for
detecting robotic grasps. The International Journal of Robotics
Research , 34(4-5):705–724, 2015.
[23] Sergey Levine, Peter Pastor, Alex Krizhevsky, Julian Ibarz, and
Deirdre Quillen. Learning hand-eye coordination for robotic grasping
with deep learning and large-scale data collection. The International
Journal of Robotics Research , page 0278364917710318, 2016.
[24] Jeffrey Mahler, Jacky Liang, Sherdil Niyaz, Michael Laskey, Richard
Doan, Xinyu Liu, Juan Aparicio Ojea, and Ken Goldberg. Dex-net
2.0: Deep learning to plan robust grasps with synthetic point clouds
and analytic grasp metrics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.09312 , 2017.
[25] Jeffrey Mahler, Matthew Matl, Xinyu Liu, Albert Li, David Gealy, and
Ken Goldberg. Dex-net 3.0: Computing robust robot suction grasp
targets in point clouds using a new analytic model and deep learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.06670 , 2017.
[26] Andrew T Miller and Peter K Allen. Graspit! a versatile simulator for
robotic grasping. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine , 11(4):110–
122, 2004.
[27] Andrew T Miller, Steffen Knoop, Henrik I Christensen, and Peter K
Allen. Automatic grasp planning using shape primitives. In Robotics
and Automation, 2003. Proceedings. ICRA’03. IEEE International
Conference on , volume 2, pages 1824–1829. IEEE, 2003.
[28] Luis Montesano, Manuel Lopes, Alexandre Bernardino, and Jos ´e
Santos-Victor. Learning object affordances: from sensory–motor
coordination to imitation. IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 24(1):15–
26, 2008.
[29] Antonio Morales, Eris Chinellato, Andrew H Fagg, and Angel P
Del Pobil. Using experience for assessing grasp reliability. Inter-
national Journal of Humanoid Robotics , 1(04):671–691, 2004.
[30] Igor Mordatch, Kendall Lowrey, and Emanuel Todorov. Ensemble-
cio: Full-body dynamic motion planning that transfers to physical
humanoids. In Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2015 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on , pages 5307–5314. IEEE, 2015.
[31] Richard M Murray, Zexiang Li, S Shankar Sastry, and S Shankara
Sastry. A mathematical introduction to robotic manipulation . CRC
press, 1994.
[32] Van-Duc Nguyen. Constructing force-closure grasps. The Interna-
tional Journal of Robotics Research , 7(3):3–16, 1988.
[33] Aaron van den Oord, Sander Dieleman, Heiga Zen, Karen Simonyan,
Oriol Vinyals, Alex Graves, Nal Kalchbrenner, Andrew Senior, and
Koray Kavukcuoglu. Wavenet: A generative model for raw audio.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03499 , 2016.
[34] Aaron van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, and Koray Kavukcuoglu.
Pixel recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.06759 ,
2016.
[35] Raphael Pelossof, Andrew Miller, Peter Allen, and Tony Jebara.
An svm learning approach to robotic grasping. In Robotics andAutomation, 2004. Proceedings. ICRA’04. 2004 IEEE International
Conference on , volume 4, pages 3512–3518. IEEE, 2004.
[36] Lerrel Pinto, James Davidson, and Abhinav Gupta. Supervision via
competition: Robot adversaries for learning tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1610.01685 , 2016.
[37] Domenico Prattichizzo, Monica Malvezzi, Marco Gabiccini, and An-
tonio Bicchi. On the manipulability ellipsoids of underactuated
robotic hands with compliance. Robotics and Autonomous Systems ,
60(3):337–346, 2012.
[38] Domenico Prattichizzo and Jeffrey C Trinkle. Grasping. In Springer
handbook of robotics , pages 955–988. Springer, 2016.
[39] Alberto Rodriguez, Matthew T Mason, and Steve Ferry. From
caging to grasping. The International Journal of Robotics Research ,
31(7):886–900, 2012.
[40] Carlos Rosales, Ra ´ul Su ´arez, Marco Gabiccini, and Antonio Bicchi.
On the synthesis of feasible and prehensile robotic grasps. In Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), 2012 IEEE International Conference on ,
pages 550–556. IEEE, 2012.
[41] Fereshteh Sadeghi and Sergey Levine. (cad) 2 rl: Real single-image
ﬂight without a single real image. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.04201 ,
2016.
[42] Anis Sahbani, Sahar El-Khoury, and Philippe Bidaud. An overview
of 3d object grasp synthesis algorithms. Robotics and Autonomous
Systems , 60(3):326–336, 2012.
[43] Ashutosh Saxena, Justin Driemeyer, and Andrew Y Ng. Robotic
grasping of novel objects using vision. The International Journal of
Robotics Research , 27(2):157–173, 2008.
[44] Ashutosh Saxena, Lawson LS Wong, and Andrew Y Ng. Learning
grasp strategies with partial shape information. In AAAI , volume 3,
pages 1491–1494, 2008.
[45] John D Schulman, Ken Goldberg, and Pieter Abbeel. Grasping and
ﬁxturing as submodular coverage problems. In Robotics Research ,
pages 571–583. Springer, 2017.
[46] Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Wojciech
Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Domain randomization for transferring
deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.06907 , 2017.
[47] Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics
engine for model-based control. In Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on , pages 5026–
5033. IEEE, 2012.
[48] Aaron van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, Lasse Espeholt, koray
kavukcuoglu, Oriol Vinyals, and Alex Graves. Conditional image
generation with pixelcnn decoders. In D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama,
U. V . Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 29 , pages 4790–4798. Curran
Associates, Inc., 2016.
[49] Ulrich Viereck, Andreas ten Pas, Kate Saenko, and Robert Platt.
Learning a visuomotor controller for real world robotic grasping using
easily simulated depth images. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.04652 ,
2017.
[50] Jonathan Weisz and Peter K Allen. Pose error robust grasping from
contact wrench space metrics. In Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
2012 IEEE International Conference on , pages 557–562. IEEE, 2012.
[51] Ziang Xie, Arjun Singh, Justin Uang, Karthik S Narayan, and Pieter
Abbeel. Multimodal blending for high-accuracy instance recognition.
InIntelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2013 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on , pages 2214–2221. IEEE, 2013.
[52] Xinchen Yan, Mohi Khansari, Yunfei Bai, Jasmine Hsu, Arkanath
Pathak, Arbhinav Gupta, James Davidson, and Honglak Lee. Learning
grasping interaction with geometry-aware 3d representations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1708.07303 , 2017.
[53] Andy Zeng, Kuan-Ting Yu, Shuran Song, Daniel Suo, Ed Walker, Al-
berto Rodriguez, and Jianxiong Xiao. Multi-view self-supervised deep
learning for 6d pose estimation in the amazon picking challenge. In
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2017 IEEE International Conference
on, pages 1386–1383. IEEE, 2017.
[54] Fangyi Zhang, J ¨urgen Leitner, Michael Milford, and Peter Corke. Sim-
to-real transfer of visuo-motor policies for reaching in clutter: Domain
randomization and adaptation with modular networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1709.05746 , 2017.