Supervising strong learners
by amplifying weak experts
Paul Christiano
OpenAI
paul@openai.comBuck Shlegeris
bshlegeris@gmail.comDario Amodei
OpenAI
damodei@openai.com
Abstract
Many real world learning tasks involve complex or hard-to-specify objectives, and
using an easier-to-specify proxy can lead to poor performance or misaligned be-
havior. One solution is to have humans provide a training signal by demonstrating
or judging performance, but this approach fails if the task is too complicated for a
human to directly evaluate. We propose Iterated Ampliﬁcation, an alternative train-
ing strategy which progressively builds up a training signal for difﬁcult problems
by combining solutions to easier subproblems. Iterated Ampliﬁcation is closely
related to Expert Iteration (Anthony et al., 2017; Silver et al., 2017b), except that it
uses no external reward function. We present results in algorithmic environments,
showing that Iterated Ampliﬁcation can efﬁciently learn complex behaviors.
1 Introduction
If we want to train an ML system to perform a task, we need to be able to evaluate how well it is
doing. Whether our training signal takes the form of labels, rewards, or something else entirely, we
need some way to generate that signal.
If our goal can be evaluated automatically, such as winning a game of Go, or if we have an algorithm
that can generate examples of correct behavior, then generating a training signal is trivial. In these
cases we might say that there is an “algorithmic” training signal.
Unfortunately, most useful tasks don’t have an algorithmic training signal. So in current applications
of machine learning, humans often provide the training signal. This can be done by having a human
demonstrate the task, for example labeling an image or teleoperating a robot, or by learning a reward
function from human judgments. For these classes of tasks, we could say there is a “human” training
signal.
However, there are harder tasks for which we can’t compute demonstrations or rewards even with
human assistance, and for which we currently have no clear method to get a meaningful training
signal. Consider making economic policy decisions, advancing the scientiﬁc frontier, or managing the
security of a large network of computers. Some of these tasks are “beyond human scale” – a single
human can’t perform them and can’t make sense of their massive observation space well enough to
judge the behavior of an agent. It may be possible for a human to judge performance in the very long
run (for example, by looking at economic growth over several years), but such long-term feedback is
very slow to learn from. We currently have no way to learn how to perform such tasks much better
than a human.
The overall situation is depicted in Table 1, which shows six different combinations of training signal
source and problem formulation (supervised learning or RL). The bulk of ML practice operates in
the top center box (supervised learning from human labels), the bottom left box (RL with a scripted
reward), and sometimes the top left box (supervised learning of algorithms). The bottom center box
Work done while at OpenAI.arXiv:1810.08575v1  [cs.LG]  19 Oct 2018Table 1: Example problems which require different kinds of training signal.
Training signal: Algorithmic Human Beyond human
Supervised
learningLearning data structures
Image classiﬁcation
Long-term prediction
Reinforcement
learningPlaying games
Driving “well”
Designing transit system
(RL from a human training signal) is beginning to be explored, and includes inverse reinforcement
learning (Ng and Russell, 2000; Abbeel and Ng, 2004; Finn et al., 2016) and RL from human feedback
(Knox and Stone, 2009; Pilarski et al., 2011; MacGlashan et al., 2017; Christiano et al., 2017). At
present there seems to be no general method to handle problems in the bottom right or top right.
It seems desirable to expand the range of tasks for which we can get a training signal, for two
reasons. First, it would enable ML systems to perform new tasks. SL and RL are very powerful
methods when we can get a training signal, so making them applicable to tasks that humans can’t
directly judge or perform could have a big impact. Second, better speciﬁcation of complex goals
and targets may be vital to building robustly beneﬁcial AI systems. In practice, when an accurate
training signal would be “beyond human scale,” we often instead ﬁnd a short-term proxy that is
correlated with what we want. But aggressively optimizing that proxy can lead to pathological behav-
ior(Lehman et al., 2018; Amodei and Clark, 2016; Amodei et al., 2016) , an example of Goodhart’s
Law.2For example, we might ﬁnd that user-reported satisfaction (which we can easily measure) is a
good proxy for long-term beneﬁt to society (which is very complicated), but if we maximize it with
RL our agent may maintain fraudulent appearances or effectively manipulate users into providing
high ratings. At large scales this kind of pathology could lead to systemic crashes, and a mismatch
between proxies and our real preferences is a major source of concerns about the safety of future
powerful AI systems (Bostrom, 2014).
In this paper we propose a general framework for building up a training signal on complex tasks by
decomposing them (with AI assistance) into simpler tasks for which we have a human or algorithmic
training signal. In our experiments we apply the framework with a number of simpliﬁcations (see
Section 4.3) to relatively simple tasks, as a ﬁrst step towards addressing the problems described
above.
1.1 Our method: Iterated Ampliﬁcation
We propose a new method, Iterated Ampliﬁcation, for a human expert Hto train an ML agent X.
Rather than having Hdemonstrate or evaluate the target behavior on their own, we allow them to
invoke several copies of the current agent Xto help them. We write AmplifyH(X)for the composite
system, consisting of Hand several copies of Xworking together to solve a problem. The agent X
then learns from AmplifyH(X)in the same way that it would traditionally learn from Halone.
To instantiate this framework we make three design decisions:
What set of tasks do we train Xto solve? In order for Xto be a useful assistant, we need to
choose a sufﬁciently broad set of tasks. In this article, we will focus on question-answering.
2“When a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure”
2How do we construct AmplifyH(X)? In this article, we focus on delegation: AmplifyH(X)
answers a question Qby havingHidentify a sequence of useful subquestions, using X
to compute a subanswer to each subquestion, and having Hdecide how to answer Qafter
seeing the subanswers.
How doesXlearn from AmplifyH(X)? In this article, we focus on supervised learning:
Xis an autoregressive model trained to predict AmplifyH(X)’s output. Future work could
instead use imitation learning, or use AmplifyH(X)to deﬁne a reward function that X
maximizes with RL.
InitiallyXbehaves randomly, so AmplifyH(X)is essentially equivalent to Hand we are effectively
learning from an expert. Over time the agent Xbecomes more powerful and the role of the expert
transitions into “coordinating” several copies of Xto solve the problem better than a single copy
could solve it. (Once Xis very sophisticated, even tasks like “identify a useful subquestion” might
be delegated.) As long as it is possible for multiple agents to collaboratively solve problems more
effectively than a single agent (perhaps using human expertise to coordinate their efforts), then
AmplifyH(X)can outperform Xand hence provide a useful training signal. We discuss this
assumption in Section 5.
The human must be involved in this process because there is no external objective to guide learning—
the objective is implicit in the way that the human coordinates the copies of X. For example, we have
no external measure of what constitutes a “good” answer to a question, this notion is only implicit
in how a human decides to combine the answers to subquestions (which usually involves both facts
and value judgments). Our goal is for Xto learn the goal at the same time that it learns to behave
competently. This is in contrast with the alternative approach of specifying a reward function and
then training a capable agent to maximize that reward function.
1.2 Outline
In Section 2 we describe Iterated Ampliﬁcation and our implementation in more detail. In Section 3
we compare our approach to prior work. In Section 4 we describe our experimental results, showing
that Iterated Ampliﬁcation can be stable and efﬁcient despite the non-stationary training signal and
lack of external objective. In Section 5 we explain why we believe that decomposability is a realistic
assumption for complex tasks in the real world.
2 Detailed instantiation of Iterated Ampliﬁcation
2.1 Predicting the human behavior
In order to reduce the burden on the human expert H, we train a “human predictor” H0, and use
this predictor to generate training data rather than consulting Hdirectly. That is, we train H0to
imitate the role of Hwhen computing AmplifyH(X), and we train Xusing AmplifyH0(X)rather
than using AmplifyH(X)directly.
BecauseH0is only learning how to identify subquestions and combine subanswers, rather than
solving an entire task, we expect to train it with much less data.
Note thatH0needs to predict how Hwill respond to subanswers provided by X. BecauseXis
changing, this distribution is non-stationary, and so we need to continuously update H0throughout
the training process.
2.2 Training overview
We train an agent Xto answer questions from some distribution D.
Our training process, depicted in Fig. 1, involves running four processes in parallel:
1.We repeatedly sample a question QD, use AmplifyH(X)to answer that question, and
record every decision made by Hduring the process. That is, Hﬁnds a subquestion Q1
that would help them answer Q, and we compute the answer A1=X(Q1). We repeat this
processktimes, where kis a ﬁxed parameter, and then Hcomputes an answer A. We store
the transcript = (Q;Q 1;A1;:::;Q k;Ak;A).
3H divides Q into sub-Qs combines answersX answers subquestionsH′ divides Q into sub-Qs combines answersX answers subquestionsH′ trained to imitate HQ1X(Q1)Q2X(Q2)…
Q1X(Q1)Q2X(Q2)…QAcollect dataset of ! = (Q, Q1, X(Q1), …, A)preﬁx ![:n] predict ![n] 
QAX trained to predict A from QQpredict Acollect dataset of (Q, A) pairsFigure 1: Schematic of our Iterated Ampliﬁcation implementation.
2.We train a model H0to predict the decisions made by Hin each of these transcripts, i.e. to
predict subquestions Qiand ﬁnal answers A.
3.We repeatedly sample a question QD, use AmplifyH0(X)to answer that question, and
record the resulting (Q;A)pairs.
4.Xis trained by supervised learning on these (Q;A)pairs.
2.3 Dynamics of training
The behavior of the agent Xdevelops over the course of training:
InitiallyXanswers questions randomly. When the human asks subquestions they frequently
receive incoherent or useless subanswers,
The human is able to answer some questions without any help from X, and eventually X
learns to copy these simple answers.
OnceXis able to provide simple answers, the human is able to provide slightly better
answers by breaking them into simple pieces. Then Xlearns to provide slightly better
answers.
This process continues, with Xgradually expanding the set of queries it can answer and
gradually improving the answers it provides. At each point in training, AmplifyH(X)is
modestly smarter than X working on its own, and Xchases this moving target.
If all goes well, at the end of this process we’re left with an agent that “approximates” the behavior of
an exponentially large team of copies of H. The hierarchical decomposition itself is discarded as
an artifact of training, and the actual procedure learned by the agent will generally not mirror the
structure used in training.
2.4 Questions with context
In practice, questions often take the form of a very large context (e.g. a hundred-page design
document) and a relatively small context-conditional question (e.g. “what are the largest risks when
implementing this design?”). In particular, this is the case in the experiments reported in Section 4.
Answering a question requires understanding the entire context, but it may be possible to decompose
a question without looking at the entire context. This allows us to apply Iterated Ampliﬁcation to
tasks where the context is too large for a human expert to observe directly. Instead, we can give H
the ability to look at small parts of the context as needed. Hopefully, Hcan decompose a question
into pieces that depend on smaller and smaller parts of the context, until arriving at questions that
depend on only isolated facts from the context.
4Large contexts also facilitate an important trick for accelerating training. In many settings, almost all
of the work of answering a question is actually about understanding the context, and it is possible to
ask many different questions about a single context.
We divideXinto two phases, a context-encoding phase and a question-answering phase. During
training, rather than sampling a single question we sample a context together with multiple questions
about that context. We reuse the work of the context-encoding phase across all of these questions.
Similarly, when computing AmplifyH(X), we reuse the context-encoding work between all of the
subquestions that Xneeds to answer. In our experiments, this speeds up training by an order of
magnitude.
2.5 Model architecture
We implement Xas an encoder-decoder architecture with self-attention, closely following the
Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017):
We represent the context as a set of facts, each of which is a sequence of tokens.
We embed each token using a look-up table. We embed facts by concatenating the token
embeddings and applying a linear projection.
We apply the Transformer encoder to the embedded facts. Our only change to the architecture
from (Vaswani et al., 2017) is inserting batchnorm after each MLP.
We embed questions in the same way we embed facts, then apply the Transformer decoder
to a batch of questions (omitting the self-attention altogether because it would correspond to
interactions amongst questions, which ought to be independent).
An autoregressive MLP generates a sequence of symbols conditioned on the result of the
Transformer decoder. It generates symbols either by outputting a set of logits or by choosing
to copy a symbol from the context (as in pointer networks (Vinyals et al., 2015)).
The human-predictor H0is also a Transformer decoder augmented with the ability to copy symbols
from previous steps. H0operates on sequences of questions and answers—like H, it never observes
the entire context.
Details of our model architecture are described in Appendix D.
3 Related Work
Expert Iteration: our method is very similar to Expert Iteration (ExIt) (Anthony et al., 2017) and
AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2017b,a) and has recently achieved strong performance in the board games
Hex, Go, Chess, and Shogi. ExIt is itself closely analogous to the Bellman update in Q learning, and
all of these can be viewed as analogs of dynamic programming where neural networks replace lookup
tables.
The key difference between our work and ExIt is the lack of an external objective. In ExIt, the expert
is produced by a search algorithm that optimizes an external objective. Our contribution is to show
that that a similar training process can be used even when the task deﬁnition is only implicit in the
decomposition and recomposition strategy.
Inverse reinforcement learning: by observing human behavior and inferring the underlying reward
function that they are optimizing,(Ng et al., 2000; Hadﬁeld-Menell et al., 2016) inverse reinforcement
learning could also potentially learn reward functions for tasks that are too challenging for humans.
Handling such tasks requires a sufﬁciently accurate model of human cognition to predict what humans
“would” prefer if we relaxed their cognitive limitations; in addition to being extremely complex, such
a model is not identiﬁable, because we never observe the ground truth about human preferences.
Iterated Ampliﬁcation is an alternative strategy that does not require solving this challenging model
speciﬁcation problem.
Debate: training AI systems to debate each other (Irving et al., 2018) is another possible approach
to training question-answering systems where a human expert cannot evaluate answers directly.
Both debate and Iterated Ampliﬁcation involve a recursive structure where AI systems help humans
address relevant subquestions. The largest conceptual difference is that in Iterated Ampliﬁcation each
5subquestion is answered by an independent copy of Xtrained by AmplifyH(X), while in a debate
the subquestions are answered by one of the debaters (who are trained to defend a particular answer
to the top-level question).
Algorithm learning: our problem differs from traditional work on learning algorithms (Graves et al.,
2016; Kaiser and Sutskever, 2015; Neelakantan et al., 2015) because we don’t assume that we have
access to ground truth labels.
Recursive model architectures: our work differs from recursive model architectures (Cai et al.,
2017; Nowak and Bruna, 2016), in that the learned model doesn’t have a recursive structure. The
recursive decomposition is used only to generate training data, and even then only a single step of
decomposition is performed in each iteration.
So the trained agent might end up solving the task in a totally different way from the decomposition
used by the human, and in particular it may learn heuristics that treat the problem holistically.
This ﬂexibility is important to the applicability of our method. It is often possible to divide a task into
easier parts, but dividing interesting problems into pieces and solving them independently can be
much less efﬁcient than considering the problem holistically.
4 Experiments
4.1 Tasks
We study Iterated Ampliﬁcation in a set of 5 toy algorithmic tasks. For each task, the agent Xis
given a large combinatorial context and asked questions about that context:
Given a permutation :f1;:::; 64g!f 1;:::; 64g, computek(x)forkup to 64.
Given a function f:f1;:::; 8g2!f1;:::; 8gand a sequence of 64assignments of the
formx:= 3 orx:=f(y;z), evaluate a particular variable.
Given a function f:f0;1g6!f  1;0;1g, answer questions of the form “What is the sum
off(x)over allxmatching the wildcard expression 01?”
Given a directed graph with 64vertices and 128edges, ﬁnd the distance from stot.
Given a rooted forest on 64vertices, ﬁnd the root of the tree containing a vertex x.
More detailed descriptions of the tasks are available in Appendix C. We train each task using a
curriculum of smaller instances, which is unrelated to our use of Iterated Ampliﬁcation (supervised
learning also needs a curriculum to learn these tasks in a reasonable amount of time even given
ground truth labels).
Rather than having a human perform the decomposition, we provide a hard-coded algorithm Hwhich
decomposes each task (though we minimize the number of times we call this algorithm). Using these
decompositions directly as a recursive algorithm is not efﬁcient for any of the tasks.
4.2 Results
In order to evaluate Iterated Ampliﬁcation, we compare it to supervised learning from the ground
truth data. The results are presented in Fig. 2. Iterated Ampliﬁcation is able to solve these tasks
effectively with at worst a modest slowdown, achieving our main goal.
The purpose of ampliﬁcation is to handle tasks where an expert can perform decomposition but can’t
solve the task directly. We don’t expect ampliﬁcation to solve those tasks as quickly as supervised
learning. Because we can learn these tasks almost as quickly as supervised learning from the ground
truth, we have achieved our main goal.
In addition to requiring modestly more training steps, training with ampliﬁcation requires about
twice as much computation per question, because we need to actually generate the training targets by
60 1 2 3 4
Total questions 1e80.00.20.40.60.81.0AccuracyPermutation powering
0 1 2 3 4
Total questions 1e8Sequential assignments
0 1 2 3 4
Total questions 1e8Wildcard search
0 1 2 3 4
Total questions 1e8Shortest path
0 1 2 3
Total questions 1e8Union find
Supervised
AmplificationFigure 2: Comparison between Iterated Ampliﬁcation (orange) and supervised learning from the
ground truth data (blue). To better illustrate the dynamics of training, in Appendix A we compare the
performance of XandAmplifyH0(X)separately for questions requiring different recursion depths.
running AmplifyH0(X).3We trained in the same wall-clock time by generating data on a parallel
worker.
Supervised learning required tens of millions of examples in order to learn these algorithms. This
would be a prohibitive cost if the examples were provided by an external expert. In contrast,
Iterated Ampliﬁcation required tens of thousands of examples in order to learn the much simpler
decompositions (numbers for each task are in Table 2 in Appendix A). The sample complexity will be
much larger for realistic tasks, where modeling Hmight require (for example) a high-quality language
model. But the general phenomenon, that learning decompositions can be much cheaper than learning
complex behaviors directly, is likely to hold for realistic tasks, since performing decomposition is
strictly easier than solving the task without the aid of X.
4.3 Simpliﬁcations
These experiments make several important simpliﬁcations:
In our experiments questions can be algorithmically decomposed into subquestions, and we
replace the human with a hand-coded algorithm. These experiments don’t shed any light on
whether humans can decompose interesting real world tasks, nor on whether it would be
feasible to learn messy real world decompositions.
We work in combinatorial domains where it it is possible to construct an algorithmic training
signal. This makes it possible for us to cheaply run experiments and easily evaluate our
performance, but in the long run we care about tasks where it is not possible to construct an
algorithmic or even human training signal.
In our experiments Xis trained by supervised learning from AmplifyH(X). In many
important applications we suspect that we would learn a reward function from AmplifyH(X)
and then train Xto maximize that reward function.
In order for Iterated Ampliﬁcation to succeed, the question distribution Dneeds to be broad
enough to cover not only the questions we care about, but also all of the subquestions asked
during the computation of AmplifyH(X). The distribution also determines how the model
will allocate its capacity, and so must be carefully chosen. In our experiments, we started
with a distribution Dthat could be used directly. In a more realistic setting, we might start
with some distribution D0of questions that have intrinsic interest, and it would be the system
designer’s responsibility to construct Dappropriately.
Removing these simpliﬁcations is a task for future work, which will ultimately test the hypothesis
that Iterated Ampliﬁcation can be usefully applied to complex real-world tasks for which no other
training strategy is available.
3Running AmplifyH0(X)requires calling both XandH0between 3 and 10 times. We train on each (Q; A)
pair about 10 times before removing it from the dataset. So the time required to generate a (Q; A)pair is
comparable to the total time spent training on it, resulting in roughly twice the total computation per question.
75 Discussion of decomposition in realistic domains
Having successfully applied Iterated Ampliﬁcation to synthetic algorithmic problems, the natural
question is whether it can actually be applied to complex real-world tasks that are “beyond human
scale.” We leave a convincing demonstration to future work, but we discuss here why we think this is
likely.
The key assumption underlying Iterated Ampliﬁcation is that a human can coordinate multiple copies
ofXto perform better than a single copy of X.
As an example, consider the problem of evaluating a proposed design for a transit system. Rather
than forcing a single copy of Xto reach a snap judgment about a proposed design, we can have
copies ofXevaluate many different considerations (estimating costs, evaluating how well the system
serves different populations, and so on). A human can then decide how to aggregate those different
considerations (potentially with help from further copies of X). We ﬂesh out this example in more
detail in Appendix B.
The problem of coordinating several copies of Xto outperform a single copy of Xis analogous to
organizing a team of humans to outperform individual humans. Fortunately, there are several ways in
which coordinating several copies of Xis easier than coordinating a team of humans:
We don’t require that the collaboration be efﬁcient, it just needs to help at all . If ten agents
working together perform “10% better” than a single agent on its own, then AmplifyH(X)
still provides a useful training signal that we can use to improve X.
The copies of Xdon’t need to run in parallel—each can start after the previous one has
ﬁnished its task. Many tasks may be inherently difﬁcult to parallelize, which is an obstacle
for human collaboration but is ﬁne for AmplifyH(X).
All of the copies of Xare trained exclusively to solve the problem they are given. We
don’t need to manage incentives, politics, or conﬂicting preferences, which are common
difﬁculties in human organizations.
Despite these difﬁculties, human organizations are often able to signiﬁcantly outperform individual
humans in many domains, supporting our key assumption.
6 Conclusion
We have shown that Iterated Ampliﬁcation can successfully solve algorithmically complex tasks
where there is no external reward function and the objective is implicit in a learned decomposition.
This offers hope for applying ML in domains where we cannot compute a suitable objective, even
with human help—as long as humans are able to decompose a task into simpler pieces. If we can
realize this hope, it will be an important step towards expanding the reach of ML and addressing
concerns about the long-term impacts of AI by reducing our reliance simple but inaccurate proxies
for complex implicit objectives.
References
Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y Ng. Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learning. In
Proceedings of the twenty-ﬁrst international conference on Machine learning , page 1. ACM, 2004.
Dario Amodei and Jack Clark. Faulty reward functions in the wild, 2016.
Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané.
Concrete problems in AI safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565 , 2016.
Thomas Anthony, Zheng Tian, and David Barber. Thinking fast and slow with deep learning and tree
search. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 5366–5376, 2017.
Nick Bostrom. Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies . Oxford University Press, 2014.
Jonathon Cai, Richard Shin, and Dawn Song. Making neural programming architectures generalize
via recursion. CoRR , abs/1704.06611, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1704.06611 .
8Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
reinforcement learning from human preferences. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , pages 4302–4310, 2017.
Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Guided cost learning: Deep inverse optimal control
via policy optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 48, 2016.
Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, Malcolm Reynolds, Tim Harley, Ivo Danihelka, Agnieszka Grabska-
Barwi ´nska, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Edward Grefenstette, Tiago Ramalho, John Agapiou, et al.
Hybrid computing using a neural network with dynamic external memory. Nature , 538(7626):471,
2016.
Dylan Hadﬁeld-Menell, Stuart J Russell, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca Dragan. Cooperative inverse
reinforcement learning. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 3909–3917,
2016.
Geoffrey Irving, Paul Christiano, and Dario Amodei. AI safety via debate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1805.00899 , 2018.
Łukasz Kaiser and Ilya Sutskever. Neural GPUs learn algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.08228 ,
2015.
W Bradley Knox and Peter Stone. Interactively shaping agents via human reinforcement: The
TAMER framework. In International Conference on Knowledge Capture , pages 9–16, 2009.
Joel Lehman, Jeff Clune, Dusan Misevic, Christoph Adami, Julie Beaulieu, Peter J Bentley, Samuel
Bernard, Guillaume Belson, David M Bryson, Nick Cheney, et al. The surprising creativity of
digital evolution: A collection of anecdotes from the evolutionary computation and artiﬁcial life
research communities. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.03453 , 2018.
James MacGlashan, Mark K Ho, Robert Loftin, Bei Peng, David Roberts, Matthew E Taylor, and
Michael L Littman. Interactive learning from policy-dependent human feedback. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1701.06049 , 2017.
Arvind Neelakantan, Quoc V Le, and Ilya Sutskever. Neural programmer: Inducing latent programs
with gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.04834 , 2015.
Andrew Y Ng and Stuart Russell. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In International
Conference on Machine learning , pages 663–670, 2000.
Andrew Y Ng, Stuart J Russell, et al. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In Icml, pages
663–670, 2000.
Alex Nowak and Joan Bruna. Divide and conquer with neural networks. CoRR , abs/1611.02401,
2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.02401 .
Patrick M Pilarski, Michael R Dawson, Thomas Degris, Farbod Fahimi, Jason P Carey, and Richard
Sutton. Online human training of a myoelectric prosthesis controller via actor-critic reinforcement
learning. In International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics , pages 1–7, 2011.
D. Silver, et al ..., and D. Hassabis. Mastering chess and shogi by self-play with a general reinforce-
ment learning algorithm. arXiv , December 2017a.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of go without
human knowledge. Nature , 550(7676):354, 2017b.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pages 6000–6010, 2017.
Oriol Vinyals, Meire Fortunato, and Navdeep Jaitly. Pointer networks. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , pages 2692–2700, 2015.
9Table 2: Total number of queries to the decomposition oracle Hfor each task. These experiments
involve algorithmic tasks where these decompositions are straightforward; the sample complexity
will likely be much larger for more realistic tasks.
TaskPermutation
poweringExpression
evaluationUnion ﬁnd Shortest pathWildcard
search
Oracle calls 7,000 6,000 20,000 24,000 10,000
A Training dynamics
Table 2 shows how many queries were collected over the course of training for each of our tasks.
Figure 3 illustrates how X“chases” the moving target AmplifyH0(X)over the course of training,
separating out performance for separate recursion depths d.
Xalways has lower accuracy than AmplifyH0(X), because it is being trained to imitate it.
AmplifyH0(X)for tasks at depth d+ 1has slightly lower accuracy than Xdoes for tasks at depth d,
because AmplifyH0(X)answering a question correctly at depth d+ 1requiresXto answer several
questions correctly at depth d.
The sawtooth pattern and decreases in accuracy are an artifact of the curriculum. In contrast with
Fig. 2, Fig. 3 shows the performance on the maximum difﬁculty of tasks yet encountered by the
model. Each time the difﬁculty of the task is increased, the accuracy of the model drops.
Figure 3: Performance at the permutation powering task, for instances requiring different recursion
depths. The green curves are the accuracy of AmplifyH0(X); the red curves are the accuracy of X,
The curves further to the right are higher depths, i.e. larger powers of the permutation. For example,
the leftmost green curve is the performance of AmplifyH0(X)at squaring or cubing permutations,
which quickly converges to 1because this task can be accomplished without X’s help. The rightmost
red curve is the performance of Xon powers between 32and63.
10B Example decomposition
Consider the task of comparing two designs for a public transit system. We could train an AI to
imitate human judgments, but human judgments may be very far from optimal. Or we could try to
collect enough information about the long-term health of transit systems to train an AI to predict
long-term outcomes, but we can only collect new datapoints with a ten-year delay. This is the kind of
task which we might want to solve with Iterated Ampliﬁcation.
Many subquestions could help the human reach a conclusion about which design is better:
Compare the usefulness of the two designs.
Compare the total cost of the two designs.
Search for any risks or possible problems with each design so that they can be evaluated
more carefully.
Combining the answers to these subquestions requires making value judgments, for example about
how we should quantify and compare beneﬁts, what kinds of risks we are willing to accept, and
so on. Our hope is for Xto learn about these value judgments at the same time that it learns to
make sophisticated decisions. Eventually, Xcan also help with the task of aggregating different
considerations.
Each of these subquestion can itself be further divided, facilitating the use of Iterated Ampliﬁcation:
Comapre the usefulness of the two designs.
–Identify and evaluate particular needs that each design may serve well or poorly.
Identify particular routes or groups of users who may be served well or poorly.
For each, identify the most important considerations (predictability, reliability,
routes served, cost) and assess how well each design meets those.
–Forecast capacity of the system and likely usage.
Evaluate current transit usage, correct for measurement issues, extrapolate trends.
Evaluate capacity of the proposals across key routes and bottlenecks.
–Estimate general performance characteristics.
Estimate how often the system will be unavailable and how common delays will be.
Compare average speeds and waiting times.
Compare plausible last-mile transit costs associated with each proposal.
Compare the total cost of the two designs.
–Estimate the non-ﬁnancial costs of the project
Identify the most important effects on the landscape and space use within the city.
Estimate the costs of disruption associated with construction and maintenance.
Identify social consequences of the transit system.
–Compare the likely construction costs of the two designs.
Identify comparable projects and estimate their costs.
Figure out how this project differs and how it’s cost is likely to differ.
–Compare the maintenance costs over time.
Identify categories of maintenance cost and estimate each of them separately.
Search for comparable projects.
–Decide how to trade off immediate costs vs distant costs.
Estimate interest rates on debt and the feasibility of borrowing to fund such a
project.
Estimate the rates of return on other uses of funds.
Evaluate our intrinsic time preferences.
 
We emphasize that this need not be an efﬁcient decomposition in order to be suitable for Iterated
Ampliﬁcation—answers to the subquestion just need to help at all on the original task. As long as
that’s true, we can use a ﬁnal copy of Xto answer the question in light of these subanswers. This
11will outperform a copy of Xwho didn’t get to see the subanswers, and can hence provide a useful
training signal for Xto improve.
If we had an external ground truth measure of quality then we wouldn’t need a human to propose this
kind of decomposition and we could instead allow an AI to search for whatever predictor worked best.
However, if we don’t have access to an external ground truth, we can use this kind of decomposition
to deﬁne the task.
C Task descriptions
An overview of our ﬁve tasks is given in Table 3. A task describes a context, a family of questions, a
decomposition strategy, and a set of primitive questions . The primitive questions are the mechanism
by which AmplifyH(X)is able to learn about the context. When Hasks a primitive question, it
immediately receives the correct answer rather than being answered by X.
C.1 Representations
All tasks other than wildcard search involve a domain with size N. For each of these tasks, we
introduce 8special identiﬁersfa;b;c;d;e;f;g;hg, and represent elements from the domain as a pair
of identiﬁers.
For sequential assignments, union ﬁnding, wildcard search, and shortest path, we represent each
integer with a separate symbol. In the case of wildcard search this results in a very large vocabulary,
most of which is used extremely rarely and simply ignored by the model. For permutation powering,
we represent the exponent kin binary.
In each domain, we can unambiguously represent facts as a sequence of elements from the domain.
We represent function values f(x) =yas the pairxy,x=f(y;z)as the triple xyz, edges (x;y)as
the pairxy, and so on. Recall that elements from the domain are themselves represented as pairs,
which we simply concatenate. For wildcard search, we simply omit zero values.
For union ﬁnd and shortest path, we preface each question with a unique symbol to disambiguate it.
We extend the vocabulary of each task with a special symbol “?” that is returned by Hwhenever the
recursive calls produce inconsistent or inconclusive results.
C.2 Curriculum
Each task has a size parameter Nthat ranges from 8 to 64. We begin training with the difﬁculty 8.
WheneverXachieves an accuracy of at least 85% at predicting the (Q;A)pairs in its dataset,4we
increment the difﬁculty.
At each point in training, we sample the task size Nto be equal to the difﬁculty with probability 0:5,
and to otherwise be sampled from a power law between 8andN.
Figure 2 shows the performance on a held out test set, which has 1=3of its examples at size 64,1=3
at size 8, and 1=3distributed uniformly between the two. This distribution is chosen to give a useful
representation of progress throughout the learning process. The graphs look essentially the same (and
would reach similar maximum accuracies) if we evaluate performance on the most difﬁcult tasks
encountered so far, except that it would no longer be meaningful to directly compare different training
runs that are at different difﬁculties (and the curriculum introduces a sawtooth artifact as in Fig. 3).
C.3 Detailed decompositions
The decompositions for union ﬁnd and shortest path are somewhat more complex than the others.
We provide the full decomposition for shortest path here. The decomposition for union ﬁnd involves
similar ideas.
What is the distance from xtoy?
4We exclude answers of “?”, since these are easy to correctly predict, but don’t indicate that the algorithm
has mastered the task.
12Table 3: The tasks on which we trained our algorithm. All tasks are paremeterized by a difﬁculty
Nthat is increased from 8to64over the course of training. The decompositions marked with * are
signiﬁcant simpliﬁcations of the full decompositions, which are described in Appendix C.3.
Permutation powering
Context A permutation ofNelements.
Questions What isk(x)? (for 2k<64)
Primitive questions What is(x)?
Decomposition2k(x) =k 
k(x)
2k+1(x) = 
k 
k(x)
Sequential assignments
ContextA functionf:f1;2;:::; 8gf 1;2;:::; 8g!f 1;2;:::8g
A sequence of Ndeﬁnitions of the form x:=f(y;z)orx:= 7
Questions What is the value of x?
Primitive questionsWhat is the deﬁnition of x?
What isf(a;b)?
DecompositionLook up deﬁnition of x.
Ifx:=f(y;z): evaluatey, evaluatez, and look up f(y;z).
Union ﬁnd
ContextAn undirected forest with Nvertices,p
Nconnected components,
and one vertex assigned a label in f1;:::; 8gin each component.
QuestionsWhat is the unique label in the component containing x?
What is a vertex on the path from xto a labeled vertex?
How far isxfrom a labeled vertex?
Primitive questionsWhat is a random neighbor of x?
Arexandyconnected?
Isxassigned a label, and if so what is it?
Decomposition* What is a vertex on the path from xto a labeled vertex?
Ifyis the result: what is the unique label in the component containing y?
Wildcard search
Context A functionf:f0;1g6!f  1;0;1gwithNnon-zero values.
Questions What isPf(x)overxmatching a wildcard expression (e.g. 010)?
Primitive questions What isf(x)?
DecompositionFill in 0for the ﬁrstin the wildcard.
Fill in 1for the ﬁrstin the wildcard.
Add the results
Shortest path
Context A directed graph with 2Nedges andNvertices.
QuestionsWhat is the distance from xtoy?
What is the ﬁrst vertex on the path from xtoy?
Primitive questionsWhat is a random neighbor of x?
Is there an edge from xtoy?
Decomposition* What is the ﬁrst vertex on the path from xtoy?
Ifzis the result: what is the distance from ztoy?–Test ifyis adjacent to x. If so, return 1.5
–z What is the ﬁrst vertex on the path from xtoy?
–Test ifzis adjacent to x. If not, return ?.
–d What is the distance from ztoy?
–Returnd+ 1.
What is the ﬁrst vertex on the path from xtoy?
–z What is the ﬁrst vertex on the path from xtoy?
–Choose one at random:
w What is the ﬁrst vertex on the path from xtoy?
w What is a random neighbor of x?
–Test whether each of zandware vertices adjacent to x.
–If neither of them is adjacent to x, return a random neighbor of x.
–If exactly one of them is adjacent to x, return that one.
–If both are adjacent to x, ask how far each of them is from z, and then return the one
that is closer.
C.4 Task distributions
For the permutation powering, union ﬁnd, shortest path, and wildcard search tasks, the context is
chosen uniformly at random from valid contexts. For sequential assignments, we sort the variables
randomly, assign each of the ﬁrstp
Nvariables to one of f1;:::; 8gat random, and let each
subsequent variable be f(y;z)for a random pair y;zof preceding variables.
For sequential assignments, shortest path, and union ﬁnd, we choose questions at random. For
wildcard search, we randomly select the number of wildcards from f1;2;:::; 6g, then we randomly
generate a query with that many wildcards. For permutation powering, we randomly choose one bit
fromf2;:::; 6gto be the leading bit of k. We set that bit to be 1and set the other bits uniformly at
random. We selected these distributions Dto ensure that every subquestion of a question draw from
Dis also given reasonable probability under D.
D Model details and hyperparameters
When computing AmplifyH0(X), we use a Polyak averaging over a time horizon of 1000 batches,
rather than directly applying the current version of X. This is analogous to the use of a target network
inQ-learning. Early experiments suggested Polyak averaging improved the stability of training, and
it does not materially slow down learning.
Our model closely follows the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), optimized with Adam.
We describe the model for completeness, along with our choice of hyperparameters.
All of our inputs are sets of 8to128sentences, each of which is a sequence of 2to8tokens from a
vocabulary of size 10to30. For example, we represent a graph as a list of pairs of vertices, and we
represent each vertex as a pair of tokens from a ﬁxed vocabulary of size 8.
We process each sequence by embedding each token in a space of dimension dembed = 100 ,
concatenating the embeddings, and then applying a learned linear transformation into a space of
dimensiondmodel = 512 . Note that there is no position encoding, because we process unordered sets
of facts.
We then process a set of sentences by applying a sequence of Nidentical layers. Each layer
implements the transformation x!z:
y LayerNorm x+ Attention x
z LayerNorm y+ BatchNorm MLP y
where Attention is multi-headed attention with 8heads of size dmodel=8,MLP is a two-layer
perceptron with hidden unit size 4dmodel and ReLU activation, LayerNorm is deﬁned as usual, and
BatchNorm normalizes across both the batch and the different sentences.
5The distance from xtoxis taken to be the length of the shortest cycle that contains x, rather than 0.
14We embed contexts using N= 6layers with self-attention. Once we have processed a context, we
answer a batch of questions about that context by using N= 3layers which attend over the context
embedding. This is almost identical to the Transformer encoder/decoder, except that a Transformer
decoder would also use self-attention (which is not appropriate here since different questions are
unrelated to one another).
This architecture outputs a single dmodel dimensional vector for each answer. To decode this into
a sequence of tokens, we train an autoregressive model that takes as input the answer vector and
the sequence of tokens produced so far, and outputs the next token. The output is allowed to either
specify a token directly or to specify an input token to copy, as in pointer networks (Vinyals et al.,
2015). If the model chooses to copy an input symbol, it outputs an attention mask to select a sentence
and a set of logits that are used to select which index it wants to copy from that sentence.
Where possible we directly copied architecture choices from (Vaswani et al., 2017) because our
goal was to focus on the training process rather than architectural innovation. We added batchnorm
because it signiﬁcantly improved performance during preliminary supervised experiments.
Each of our training runs involve between 100;000and200;000batches. Each batch contains 50
contexts. The number of facts describing a context varies from task to task, and varies over the course
of training as the task difﬁculty increases. The number of questions per context was the same as the
number of facts. By the end of training, this quantity was either 64or128depending on the task.
The model was optimized with Adam, with learning rate 10 5,2= 0:98, and gradient clipping.
These parameters were chosen based on early supervised experiments.
15