Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
EMERGENT TOOL USEFROM MULTI -AGENT
AUTOCURRICULA
Bowen Baker
OpenAI
bowen@openai.comIngmar Kanitscheider
OpenAI
ingmar@openai.comTodor Markov
OpenAI
todor@openai.comYi Wu
OpenAI
jxwuyi@openai.com
Glenn Powell
OpenAI
glenn@openai.comBob McGrew
OpenAI
bmcgrew@openai.comIgor Mordatchy
Google Brain
imordatch@google.com
ABSTRACT
Through multi-agent competition, the simple objective of hide-and-seek , and stan-
dard reinforcement learning algorithms at scale, we ﬁnd that agents create a self-
supervised autocurriculum inducing multiple distinct rounds of emergent strategy,
many of which require sophisticated tool use and coordination. We ﬁnd clear evi-
dence of six emergent phases in agent strategy in our environment, each of which
creates a new pressure for the opposing team to adapt; for instance, agents learn
to build multi-object shelters using moveable boxes which in turn leads to agents
discovering that they can overcome obstacles using ramps. We further provide ev-
idence that multi-agent competition may scale better with increasing environment
complexity and leads to behavior that centers around far more human-relevant
skills than other self-supervised reinforcement learning methods such as intrinsic
motivation. Finally, we propose transfer and ﬁne-tuning as a way to quantitatively
evaluate targeted capabilities, and we compare hide-and-seek agents to both in-
trinsic motivation and random initialization baselines in a suite of domain-speciﬁc
intelligence tests.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Creating intelligent artiﬁcial agents that can solve a wide variety of complex human-relevant tasks
has been a long-standing challenge in the artiﬁcial intelligence community. Of particular relevance
to humans will be agents that can sense and interact with objects in a physical world. One approach
to creating these agents is to explicitly specify desired tasks and train a reinforcement learning
(RL) agent to solve them. On this front, there has been much recent progress in solving physically
grounded tasks, e.g. dexterous in-hand manipulation (Rajeswaran et al., 2017; Andrychowicz et al.,
2018) or locomotion of complex bodies (Schulman et al., 2015; Heess et al., 2017). However,
specifying reward functions or collecting demonstrations in order to supervise these tasks can be
This was a large project and many people made signiﬁcant contributions. Bowen, Bob, and Igor conceived
the project and provided guidance through all stages of the work. Bowen created the initial environment,
infrastructure and models, and obtained the ﬁrst results of sequential skill progression. Ingmar obtained the
ﬁrst results of tool use, contributed to environment variants, created domain-speciﬁc statistics, and with Bowen
created the ﬁnal environment. Todor created the manipulation tasks in the transfer suite, helped Yi with the
RND baseline, and prepared code for open-sourcing. Yi created the navigation tasks in the transfer suite,
intrinsic motivation comparisons, and contributed to environment variants. Glenn contributed to designing the
ﬁnal environment and created ﬁnal renderings and project video. Igor provided research supervision and team
leadership.
yWork performed while at OpenAI
1arXiv:1909.07528v2  [cs.LG]  11 Feb 2020Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
(a) Running and Chasing (b) Fort Building
Hiders(c) Ramp Use
(d) Ramp Defense (e) Box Surﬁng (f) Surf Defense
Seekers
# Episodes (x10 )6
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500−50050Reward
Figure 1: Emergent Skill Progression From Multi-Agent Autocurricula. Through the reward signal
of hide-and-seek (shown on the y-axis), agents go through 6 distinct stages of emergence. (a) Seekers
(red) learn to chase hiders, and hiders learn to crudely run away. (b) Hiders (blue) learn basic tool
use, using boxes and sometimes existing walls to construct forts. (c) Seekers learn to use ramps to
jump into the hiders’ shelter. (d) Hiders quickly learn to move ramps to the edge of the play area, far
from where they will build their fort, and lock them in place. (e) Seekers learn that they can jump
from locked ramps to unlocked boxes and then surf the box to the hiders’ shelter, which is possible
because the environment allows agents to move together with the box regardless of whether they are
on the ground or not. (f) Hiders learn to lock all the unused boxes before constructing their fort. We
plot the mean over 3 independent training runs with each individual seed shown with a dotted line.
Please see openai.com/blog/emergent-tool-use for example videos.
time consuming and costly. Furthermore, the learned skills in these single-agent RL settings are
inherently bounded by the task description; once the agent has learned to solve the task, there is
little room to improve.
Due to the high likelihood that direct supervision will not scale to unboundedly complex tasks, many
have worked on unsupervised exploration and skill acquisition methods such as intrinsic motivation.
However, current undirected exploration methods scale poorly with environment complexity and
are drastically different from the way organisms evolve on Earth. The vast amount of complexity
and diversity on Earth evolved due to co-evolution and competition between organisms, directed by
natural selection (Dawkins & Krebs, 1979). When a new successful strategy or mutation emerges,
it changes the implicit task distribution neighboring agents need to solve and creates a new pressure
2Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
for adaptation. These evolutionary arms races create implicit autocurricula (Leibo et al., 2019a)
whereby competing agents continually create new tasks for each other. There has been much success
in leveraging multi-agent autocurricula to solve multi-player games, both in classic discrete games
such as Backgammon (Tesauro, 1995) and Go (Silver et al., 2017), as well as in continuous real-time
domains such as Dota (OpenAI, 2018) and Starcraft (Vinyals et al., 2019). Despite the impressive
emergent complexity in these environments, the learned behavior is quite abstract and disembodied
from the physical world. Our work sees itself in the tradition of previous studies that showcase
emergent complexity in simple physically grounded environments (Sims, 1994a; Bansal et al., 2018;
Jaderberg et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019); the success in these settings inspires conﬁdence that inducing
autocurricula in physically grounded and open-ended environments could eventually enable agents
to acquire an unbounded number of human-relevant skills.
We introduce a new mixed competitive and cooperative physics-based environment in which agents
compete in a simple game of hide-and-seek. Through only a visibility-based reward function and
competition, agents learn many emergent skills and strategies including collaborative tool use, where
agents intentionally change their environment to suit their needs. For example, hiders learn to create
shelter from the seekers by barricading doors or constructing multi-object forts, and as a counter
strategy seekers learn to use ramps to jump into hiders’ shelter. Moreover, we observe signs of dy-
namic and growing complexity resulting from multi-agent competition and standard reinforcement
learning algorithms; we ﬁnd that agents go through as many as six distinct adaptations of strategy
and counter-strategy, which are depicted in Figure 1. We further present evidence that multi-agent
co-adaptation may scale better with environment complexity and qualitatively centers around more
human-interpretable behavior than intrinsically motivated agents.
However, as environments increase in scale and multi-agent autocurricula become more open-ended,
evaluating progress by qualitative observation will become intractable. We therefore propose a
suite of targeted intelligence tests to measure capabilities in our environment that we believe our
agents may eventually learn, e.g. object permanence (Baillargeon & Carey, 2012), navigation, and
construction. We ﬁnd that for a number of the tests, agents pretrained in hide-and-seek learn faster
or achieve higher ﬁnal performance than agents trained from scratch or pretrained with intrinsic
motivation; however, we ﬁnd that the performance differences are not drastic, indicating that much
of the skill and feature representations learned in hide-and-seek are entangled and hard to ﬁne-tune.
The main contributions of this work are: 1) clear evidence that multi-agent self-play can lead to
emergent autocurricula with many distinct and compounding phase shifts in agent strategy, 2) evi-
dence that when induced in a physically grounded environment, multi-agent autocurricula can lead
to human-relevant skills such as tool use, 3) a proposal to use transfer as a framework for evaluating
agents in open-ended environments as well as a suite of targeted intelligence tests for our domain,
and 4) open-sourced environments and code1for environment construction to encourage further
research in physically grounded multi-agent autocurricula.
2 R ELATED WORK
There is a long history of using self-play in multi-agent settings. Early work explored self-play
using genetic algorithms (Paredis, 1995; Pollack et al., 1997; Rosin & Belew, 1995; Stanley & Mi-
ikkulainen, 2004). Sims (1994a) and Sims (1994b) studied the emergent complexity in morphology
and behavior of creatures that coevolved in a simulated 3D world. Open-ended evolution was fur-
ther explored in the environments Polyworld (Yaeger, 1994) and Geb (Channon et al., 1998), where
agents compete and mate in a 2D world, and in Tierra (Ray, 1992) and Avida (Ofria & Wilke, 2004),
where computer programs compete for computational resources. More recent work attempted to
formulate necessary preconditions for open-ended evolution (Taylor, 2015; Soros & Stanley, 2014).
Co-adaptation between agents and environments can also give rise to emergent complexity (Florensa
et al., 2017; Sukhbaatar et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019). In the context of multi-agent RL, Tesauro
(1995), Silver et al. (2016), OpenAI (2018), Jaderberg et al. (2019) and Vinyals et al. (2019) used
self-play with deep RL techniques to achieve super-human performance in Backgammon, Go, Dota,
Capture-the-Flag and Starcraft, respectively. Bansal et al. (2018) trained agents in a simulated 3D
physics environment to compete in various games such as sumo wrestling and soccer goal shooting.
In Liu et al. (2019), agents learn to manipulate a soccer ball in a 3D soccer environment and discover
1Code can be found at github.com/openai/multi-agent-emergence-environments .
3Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
emergent behaviors such as ball passing and interception. In addition, communication has also been
shown to emerge from multi-agent RL (Sukhbaatar et al., 2016; Foerster et al., 2016; Lowe et al.,
2017; Mordatch & Abbeel, 2018).
Intrinsic motivation methods have been widely studied in the literature (Chentanez et al., 2005;
Singh et al., 2010). One example is count-based exploration, where agents are incentivized to reach
infrequently visited states by maintaining state visitation counts (Strehl & Littman, 2008; Bellemare
et al., 2016; Tang et al., 2017) or density estimators (Ostrovski et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2019b).
Another paradigm are transition-based methods, in which agents are rewarded for high prediction
error in a learned forward or inverse dynamics model (Schmidhuber, 1991; Stadie et al., 2015;
Mohamed & Rezende, 2015; Houthooft et al., 2016; Achiam & Sastry, 2017; Pathak et al., 2017;
Burda et al., 2019a; Haber et al., 2018). Jaques et al. (2019) consider multi-agent scenarios and
adopt causal inﬂuence as a motivation for coordination. In our work, we utilize intrinsic motivation
methods as an alternative exploration baseline to multi-agent autocurricula. Similar comparisons
have also been made in Haber et al. (2018) and Leibo et al. (2019b).
Tool use is a hallmark of human and animal intelligence (Hunt, 1996; Shumaker et al., 2011); how-
ever, learning tool use in RL settings can be a hard exploration problem when rewards are unaligned.
For example, in Forestier et al. (2017); Xie et al. (2019) a real-world robot learns to solve various
tasks requiring tools. In Bapst et al. (2019), an agent solves construction tasks in a 2-D environment
using both model-based and model-free methods. Allen et al. (2019) uses a combination of human-
designed priors and model-based policy optimization to solve a collection of physics-based puzzles
requiring tool use. However, in each of these works, agents were explicitly incentivized to inter-
act with and use tools, whereas in our environment agents implicitly create this incentive through
multi-agent competition.
3 H IDE AND SEEK
Agents are tasked with competing in a two-team hide-and-seek game in a physics-based environ-
ment. The hiders are tasked with avoiding line of sight from the seekers , and the seekers are tasked
with keeping vision of the hiders. There are objects scattered throughout the environment that the
agents can grab and also lock in place. There are also randomly generated immovable rooms and
walls that the agents must learn to navigate. Before the game of hide-and-seek begins, the hiders
are given a preparation phase where the seekers are immobilized, giving the hiders a chance to run
away or change their environment.
There are no explicit incentives for agents to interact with objects in the environment; the only
supervision given is through the hide-and-seek objective. Agents are given a team based reward;
hiders are given a reward of 1 if all hiders are hidden and -1 if any hider is seen by a seeker. Seekers
are given the opposite reward, -1 if all hiders are hidden and +1 otherwise. To conﬁne agent behavior
to a reasonable space, agents are penalized with a reward of -10 if they go too far outside of the play
area (outside an 18 meter square). An episode lasts 240 timesteps, the ﬁrst 40% of which are the
preparation phase where all agents are given zero reward.
We simulate the environment in the MUJOCO physics engine (Todorov et al., 2012). The world is
populated with 1 to 3 hiders, 1 to 3 seekers, 3 to 9 movable boxes of which at least 3 are elongated, 2
movable ramps, and randomly generated static walls and rooms. We also experiment with a simpler,
less randomized environment described in Appendix A.3. Agents observe the position, velocity, and
size (in the case of the randomly shaped boxes) of objects and other agents. If entities are not in
line-of-sight of the agent or not in a 135 degree cone in front of the agent, then they are masked out
in the policy. Agents also have 30 range sensors arrayed evenly around them, similar to a lidar. In
addition, each agent observes its own team and other agents’ teams as well as how much time is left
in the preparation phase.
Agents are simulated as spherical objects and have 3 action types that can be chosen simultaneously
at each time step. They may move by setting a discretized force along their xandyaxis and torque
around their z-axis. They have a single binary action to grab objects, which binds the agent to the
closest object while the action is enabled. Agents may also lock objects in place with a single binary
action. Objects may be unlocked only by agents on the team of the agent who originally locked the
object. Agents may only grab or lock objects that are in front of them and within a small radius.
4Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
4 P OLICY OPTIMIZATION
Agents are trained using self-play, which acts as a natural curriculum as agents always play oppo-
nents of an appropriate level.
Agent policies are composed of two separate networks with different parameters – a policy network
which produces an action distribution and a critic network which predicts the discounted future re-
turns. Policies are optimized using Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) and
Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) (Schulman et al., 2015), and training is performed using
rapid (OpenAI, 2018), a large-scale distributed RL framework. We utilize decentralized execution
and centralized training. At execution time, each agent acts given only its own observations and
memory state. At optimization time, we use a centralized omniscient value function for each agent,
which has access to the full environment state without any information masked due to visibility,
similar to Pinto et al. (2017); Lowe et al. (2017); Foerster et al. (2018).
In all reported experiments, agents share the same policy parameters but act and observe indepen-
dently; however, we found using separate policy parameters per agent also achieved all six stages of
emergence but at reduced sample efﬁciency.
Fully
Connected
Fully
Connected
Fully
Connected
x, v
of self
LIDAR
x, v
of other agents
x, v, size
of boxes
x, v
of rampsPolicy Architecture
Entity Embeddings
Masked Residual Self 
Attention across entitiesCircular 1D
ConvolutionGenerate masks from frontal
vision cone and line of sight
# agents-1
# boxes
# ramps1Fully
Connected
Masked
Average Pooling
Movement
ActionGrabbing
ActionLocking
ActionLSTM
Figure 2: Agent Policy Architecture. All entities are embedded with fully connected layers with
shared weights across entity types, e.g. all box entities are encoded with the same function. The
policy is ego-centric so there is only one embedding of “self” and (#agents 1)embeddings of
other agents. Embeddings are then concatenated and processed with masked residual self-attention
and pooled into a ﬁxed sized vector (all of which admits a variable number of entities). xandv
stand for state (position and orientation) and velocity.
We utilize entity-centric observations (D ˇzeroski et al., 2001; Diuk et al., 2008) and use attention
mechanisms to capture object-level information (Duan et al., 2017; Zambaldi et al., 2018). As
shown in Figure 2 we use a self-attention (Vaswani et al., 2017) based policy architecture over
entities, which is permutation invariant and generalizes to varying number of entities. More details
can be found in Appendix B.
5Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
0 100 200 300 400 500
# Episodes (x )0.51.01.52.02.5Distance (m)Object Movement
Max Ramp Movement
Max Ramp Movement - PrepMax Box Movement
Max Box Movement - Prep
1 2 3 4 5 6
0 100 200 300 400 500
# Episodes (x )01234Number LockedObject Locking
Number Ramp Locked
Number Ramp Locked - PrepNumber Box Locked
Number Box Locked - Prep
1 2 3 4 5 6
Figure 3: Environment speciﬁc statistics used to track stages of emergence in hide-and-seek. We
plot the mean across 3 seeds with each individual seed shown in a dotted line, and we overlay the 6
emergent phases of strategy: (1) Running and Chasing, (2) Fort Building, (3) Ramp Use, (4) Ramp
Defense, (5) Box Surﬁng, (6) Surf Defense. We track the maximum movement of any box or ramp
during the game as well as during the preparation phase (denoted with “Prep”). We similarly track
how many objects of each type were locked at the end of the episode and preparation phase. As
agents train, their interaction with the tools in their environment changes. For instance, as the agents
learn to build forts they move boxes and lock boxes much more during the preparation phase.
5 A UTO-CURRICULA AND EMERGENT BEHAVIOR
As agents train against each other in hide-and-seek, as many as six distinct strategies emerge, each
of which creates a previously non-existing pressure for agents to progress to the next stage. Note that
there are no direct incentives for agents to interact with objects or to explore, but rather the emergent
strategies are solely a result of the autocurriculum induced by multi-agent competition. Figure 1
shows the progression of emergent strategies agents learn in our environment (see Appendix A.1 for
trajectory traces of each strategy2).
Initially, hiders and seekers learn to crudely run away and chase. After approximately 25 million
episodes of hide-and-seek, the hiders learn to use the tools at their disposal and intentionally modify
their environment. They begin to construct secure shelters in which to hide by moving many boxes
together or against walls and locking them in place. After another 75 million episodes, the seekers
also learn rudimentary tool use; they learn to move and use ramps to jump over obstacles, allowing
them to enter the hiders’ shelter. 10 million episodes later, the hiders learn to defend against this
strategy; the hiders learn to bring the ramps to the edge of the play area and lock them in place,
seemingly removing the only tool the seekers have at their disposal.
We originally believed defending against ramp use would be the last stage of emergence in this
environment; however, we were surprised to ﬁnd that yet two more qualitatively new strategies
emerged. After 380 million total episodes of training, the seekers learn to bring a box to the edge of
the play area where the hiders have locked the ramps. The seekers then use the ramp to move on top
of the box and surf it to the hiders’ shelter. This is possible because the agents’ movement action
allows them to apply a force on themselves regardless of whether they are on the ground or not; if
they do this while grabbing the box under them, the box will move with while they are on top of it.
In response, the hiders learn to lock all of the boxes in place before building their shelter.3
In all stages of strategy agents must learn to coordinate within their team. Similar to Liu et al. (2019),
we use team-based rewards such that agents are required to collaborate in order to succeed; however,
in our work we require neither population-based training (Jaderberg et al., 2017) or evolved dense
rewards (Jaderberg et al., 2019). Notably, hiders learn efﬁcient division of labor; for instance, when
constructing shelter they often separately bring their own box to the construction area. Furthermore,
2Seeopenai.com/blog/emergent-tool-use for sample videos.
3Note that the discovery of a new skill does not necessarily correlate to the reward of a team changing. For
example, the hider reward still decreases even after the discovery of surf defense, which is likely because teams
with one or two hiders often do not have enough time to lock all of the boxes in play.
6Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
as hiders attempt to defend against box surﬁng by locking boxes in place during the preparation
phase, we ﬁnd that 2 and 3 hider teams are able to lock 25% and 36% more boxes, respectively, than
a single hider team, indicating that larger teams are able to divide labor and accomplish an objective
a smaller team could not.
Many stages of emergent strategy can be mapped to behavioral shifts in the way agents interact with
the tools in their environment, similar to Leibo et al. (2017); Perolat et al. (2017). We therefore
track basic statistics about the agents’ interaction with objects during training, shown in Figure 3.
For instance, as the hiders learn to build forts, they move and lock boxes much more during the
preparation phase. Similarly, as the seekers learn to move and use ramps, the ramp movement in the
main phase of the game increases, and as they learn to “box surf” there is a slight increase in the
box movement during the main phase of the game. Finally, as the hiders learn to defend against this
strategy by locking all boxes in place, the number of locked boxes in the preparation phase increases.
32k 64k 128k
Batch Size050100150200# Episodes (x106)
167.4M Ep
132.3M Ep155.2M EpBatch Size
020406080100120140
Time (Hours)98.8 Hr
34.0 Hr
19.8 Hr
Figure 4: Effect of Scale on Emergent Autocur-
ricula. Number of episodes (blue) and wall clock
time (orange) required to achieve stage 4 (ramp
defense) of the emergent skill progression pre-
sented in Figure 1. Batch size denotes number of
chunks, each of which consists of 10 contiguous
transitions (the truncation length for backpropaga-
tion through time).We found that scale plays a critical role in en-
abling progression through the emergent au-
tocurricula in hide-and-seek. The default
model, which uses a batch size of 64,000 and
1.6 million parameters, requires 132.3 million
episodes (31.7 billion frames) over 34 hours of
training to reach stage 4 of the skill progres-
sion, i.e. ramp defense. In Figure 4 we show
the effect of varying the batch size in our agents
ability to reach stage 4. We ﬁnd that larger
batch sizes lead to much quicker training time
by virtue of reducing the number of required
optimization steps, while only marginally af-
fecting sample efﬁciency down to a batch size
of 32,000; however, we found that experiments
with batch sizes of 16,000 and 8,000 never con-
verged.
We ﬁnd the emergent autocurriculum to be
fairly robust as long as we randomize the en-
vironment during training. If randomization is
reduced, we ﬁnd that fewer stages of the skill progression emerges, and at times less sophisticated
strategies emerge instead (e.g. hiders can learn to run away and use boxes as moveable shields.);
see Appendix A.2 for more details. In addition, we ﬁnd that design choices such as the minimum
number of elongated boxes or giving each agent their own locking mechanism instead of a team
based locking mechanism can drastically increase the sample complexity. We also experimented
with adding additional objects and objectives to our hide-and-seek environment as well as with
several game variants instead of hide-and-seek (see Appendix A.6). We ﬁnd that these alternative
environments also lead to emergent tool use, providing further evidence that multi-agent interaction
is a promising path towards self-supervised skill acquisition.
6 E VALUATION
In the previous section we presented evidence that hide-and-seek induces a multi-agent autocur-
riculum such that agents continuously learn new skills and strategies. As is the case with many
unsupervised reinforcement learning methods, the objective being optimized does not directly in-
centivize the learned behavior, making evaluation of those behaviors nontrivial. Tracking reward is
an insufﬁcient evaluation metric in multi-agent settings, as it can be ambiguous in indicating whether
agents are improving evenly or have stagnated. Metrics like ELO (Elo, 1978) or Trueskill (Herbrich
et al., 2007) can more reliably measure whether performance is improving relative to previous pol-
icy versions or other policies in a population; however, these metrics still do not give insight into
whether improved performance stems from new adaptations or improving previously learned skills.
Finally, using environment speciﬁc statistics such as object movement (see Figure 3) can also be
ambiguous, e.g. the choice to track absolute movement does not illuminate which direction agents
moved, and designing sufﬁcient metrics will become difﬁcult and costly as environments scale.
7Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
0 2 4 6 8 10
Samples (x10 )3456DistanceAgent Movement
0 2 4 6 8 10
Samples (x10 )012345DistanceBox Movement
Count-Based, 1 Agent ~ Box Position Count-Based, 1 Agent ~ Full Box Count-Based, 1-3 Agents ~ Full RND, 1-3 Agents ~ Full
Figure 5: Behavioral Statistics from Count-Based Exploration Variants and Random Network Dis-
tillation (RND) Across 3 Seeds. We compare net box movement and maximum agent movement
between state representations for count-based exploration: Single agent, 2-D box location (blue);
Single agent, box location, rotation and velocity (green); 1-3 agents, full observation space (red).
Also shown is RND for 1-3 agents with full observation space (purple). We train all agents to
convergence as measured by their behavioral statistics.
In Section 6.1, we ﬁrst qualitatively compare the behaviors learned in hide-and-seek to those learned
from intrinsic motivation, a common paradigm for unsupervised exploration and skill acquisition. In
Section 6.2, we then propose a suite of domain-speciﬁc intelligence tests to quantitatively measure
and compare agent capabilities.
6.1 C OMPARISON TO INTRINSIC MOTIVATION
Intrinsic motivation has become a popular paradigm for incentivizing unsupervised exploration and
skill discovery, and there has been recent success in using intrinsic motivation to make progress in
sparsely rewarded settings (Bellemare et al., 2016; Burda et al., 2019b). Because intrinsically mo-
tivated agents are incentivized to explore uniformly, it is conceivable that they may not have mean-
ingful interactions with the environment (as with the “noisy-TV” problem (Burda et al., 2019a)).
As a proxy for comparing meaningful interaction in the environment, we measure agent and object
movement over the course of an episode.
We ﬁrst compare behaviors learned in hide-and-seek to a count-based exploration baseline (Strehl &
Littman, 2008) with an object invariant state representation, which is computed in a similar way as
in the policy architecture in Figure 2. Count-based objectives are the simplest form of state density
based incentives, where one explicitly keeps track of state visitation counts and rewards agents for
reaching infrequently visited states (details can be found in Appendix D). In contrast to the original
hide-and-seek environment where the initial locations of agents and objects are randomized, we
restrict the initial locations to a quarter of the game area to ensure that the intrinsically motivated
agents receive additional rewards for exploring.
We ﬁnd that count-based exploration leads to the largest agent and box movement if the state repre-
sentation only contains the 2-D location of boxes: the agent consistently interacts with objects and
learns to navigate. Yet, when using progressively higher-dimensional state representations, such as
box location, rotation and velocity or 1-3 agents with full observation space, agent movement and,
in particular, box movement decrease substantially. This is a severe limitation because it indicates
that, when faced with highly complex environments, count-based exploration techniques require
identifying by hand the “interesting” dimensions in state space that are relevant for the behaviors
one would like the agents to discover. Conversely, multi-agent self-play does not need this degree of
supervision. We also train agents with random network distillation (RND) (Burda et al., 2019b), an
intrinsic motivation method designed for high dimensional observation spaces, and ﬁnd it to perform
slightly better than count-based exploration in the full state setting.
6.2 T RANSFER AND FINE-TUNING AS EVALUATION
We propose to use transfer to a suite of domain-speciﬁc tasks in order to asses agent capabilities. To
this end, we have created 5 benchmark intelligence tests that include both supervised and reinforce-
8Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
0 1 2 3 4
Samples (x10 )0.00.20.40.60.81.0Normalized reward
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Samples (x10 )0.00.20.40.60.81.0Normalized rewardObject Counting Lock and Return Sequential Lock Blueprint Construction Shelter Construction
Pretrained in Hide-and-Seek Trained From Scratch Pretrained with Count-Based Intrinsic Motivation0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Samples (x10 )0.00.20.40.60.81.0Accuracy
0 2 4 6 810 12
Samples (x10 )0.00.20.40.60.81.0Normalized reward
0 1 2 3
Samples (x10 )0.00.20.40.60.81.0Normalized reward
Figure 6: Fine-tuning Results. We plot the mean normalized performance and 90% conﬁdence inter-
val across 3 seeds smoothed with an exponential moving average, except for Blueprint Construction
where we plot over 6 seeds due to higher training variance.
ment learning tasks. The tests use the same action space, observation space, and types of objects as
in the hide-and-seek environment. We examine whether pretraining agents in our multi-agent envi-
ronment and then ﬁne-tuning them on the evaluation suite leads to faster convergence or improved
overall performance compared to training from scratch or pretraining with count-based intrinsic mo-
tivation. We ﬁnd that on 3 out of 5 tasks, agents pretrained in the hide-and-seek environment learn
faster and achieve a higher ﬁnal reward than both baselines.
We categorize the 5 intelligence tests into 2 domains: cognition and memory tasks, and manipulation
tasks. We brieﬂy describe the tasks here; for the full task descriptions, see Appendix C. For all tasks,
we reinitialize the parameters of the ﬁnal dense layer and layernorm for both the policy and value
networks.
Cognition and memory tasks:
In the Object Counting supervised task, we aim to measure whether the agents have a sense of object
permanence; the agent is pinned to a location and watches as 6 boxes each randomly move to the
right or left where they eventually become obscured by a wall. It is then asked to predict how many
boxes have gone to each side for many timesteps after all boxes have disappeared. The agent’s policy
parameters are frozen and we initialize a classiﬁcation head off of the LSTM hidden state. In the
baseline, the policy network has frozen random parameters and only the classiﬁcation head off of
the LSTM hidden state is trained.
InLock and Return we aim to measure whether the agent can remember its original position while
performing a new task. The agent must navigate an environment with 6 random rooms and 1 box,
lock the box, and return to its starting position.
InSequential Lock there are 4 boxes randomly placed in 3 random rooms without doors but with
a ramp in each room. The agent needs to lock all the boxes in a particular order — a box is only
lockable when it is locked in the correct order — which is unobserved by the agent. The agent must
discover the order, remember the position and status of visited boxes, and use ramps to navigate
between rooms in order to ﬁnish the task efﬁciently.
Manipulation tasks: With these tasks we aim to measure whether the agents have any latent skill
or representation useful for manipulating objects.
In the Construction From Blueprint task, there are 8 cubic boxes in an open room and between 1
and 4 target sites. The agent is tasked with placing a box on each target site.
In the Shelter Construction task there are 3 elongated boxes, 5 cubic boxes, and one static cylinder.
The agent is tasked with building a shelter around the cylinder.
9Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Results: In Figure 6 we show the performance on the suite of tasks for the hide-and-seek, count-
based, and trained from scratch policies across 3 seeds. The hide-and-seek pretrained policy per-
forms slightly better than both the count-based and the randomly initialized baselines in Lock and
Return ,Sequential Lock andConstruction from Blueprint ; however, it performs slightly worse than
the count-based baseline on Object Counting , and it achieves the same ﬁnal reward but learns slightly
slower than the randomly initialized baseline on Shelter Construction .
We believe the cause for the mixed transfer results is rooted in agents learning skill representa-
tions that are entangled and difﬁcult to ﬁne-tune. We conjecture that tasks where hide-and-seek
pretraining outperforms the baseline are due to reuse of learned feature representations, whereas
better-than-baseline transfer on the remaining tasks would require reuse of learned skills, which is
much more difﬁcult. This evaluation metric highlights the need for developing techniques to reuse
skills effectively from a policy trained in one environment to another. In addition, as future en-
vironments become more diverse and agents must use skills in more contexts, we may see more
generalizable skill representations and more signiﬁcant signal in this evaluation approach.
In Appendix A.5 we further evaluate policies sampled during each phase of emergent strategy on
the suite of targeted intelligence tasks, by which we can gain intuition as to whether the capabilities
we measure improve with training, are transient and accentuated during speciﬁc phases, or gener-
ally uncorrelated to progressing through the autocurriculum. Noteably, we ﬁnd the agent’s memory
improves through training as indicated by performance in the navigation tasks; however, perfor-
mance in the manipulation tasks is uncorrelated, and performance in object counting changes seems
transient with respect to source hide-and-seek performance.
7 D ISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have demonstrated that simple game rules, multi-agent competition, and standard reinforcement
learning algorithms at scale can induce agents to learn complex strategies and skills. We observed
emergence of as many as six distinct rounds of strategy and counter-strategy, suggesting that multi-
agent self-play with simple game rules in sufﬁciently complex environments could lead to open-
ended growth in complexity. We then proposed to use transfer as a method to evaluate learning
progress in open-ended environments and introduced a suite of targeted intelligence tests with which
to compare agents in our domain.
Our results with hide-and-seek should be viewed as a proof of concept showing that multi-agent
autocurricula can lead to physically grounded and human-relevant behavior. We acknowledge that
the strategy space in this environment is inherently bounded and likely will not surpass the six
modes presented as is; however, because it is built in a high-ﬁdelity physics simulator it is physically
grounded and very extensible. In order to support further research in multi-agent autocurricula, we
are open-sourcing our environment code.
Hide-and-seek agents require an enormous amount of experience to progress through the six stages
of emergence, likely because the reward functions are not directly aligned with the resulting behav-
ior. While we have found that standard reinforcement learning algorithms are sufﬁcient, reducing
sample complexity in these systems will be an important line of future research. Better policy learn-
ing algorithms or policy architectures are orthogonal to our work and could be used to improve
sample efﬁciency and performance on transfer evaluation metrics.
We also found that agents were very skilled at exploiting small inaccuracies in the design of the
environment, such as seekers surﬁng on boxes without touching the ground, hiders running away
from the environment while shielding themselves with boxes, or agents exploiting inaccuracies of
the physics simulations to their advantage. Investigating methods to generate environments with-
out these unwanted behaviors is another import direction of future research (Amodei et al., 2016;
Lehman et al., 2018).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Pieter Abbeel, Rewon Child, Jeff Clune, Harri Edwards, Jessica Hamrick, Joel Liebo,
John Schulman and Peter Welinder for their insightful comments on this manuscript. We also thank
Alex Ray for writing parts of our open sourced code.
10Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
REFERENCES
Joshua Achiam and Shankar Sastry. Surprise-based intrinsic motivation for deep reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.01732 , 2017.
Kelsey R Allen, Kevin A Smith, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. The tools challenge: Rapid trial-and-
error learning in physical problem solving. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.09620 , 2019.
Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Man ´e. Con-
crete problems in AI safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565 , 2016.
Marcin Andrychowicz, Bowen Baker, Maciek Chociej, Rafal Jozefowicz, Bob McGrew, Jakub Pa-
chocki, Arthur Petron, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Alex Ray, et al. Learning dexterous
in-hand manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.00177 , 2018.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.06450 , 2016.
Rene Baillargeon and Susan Carey. Core cognition and beyond: The acquisition of physical and
numerical knowledge. In In S. Pauen (Ed.), Early Childhood Development and Later Outcome ,
pp. 33–65. University Press, 2012.
Trapit Bansal, Jakub Pachocki, Szymon Sidor, Ilya Sutskever, and Igor Mordatch. Emergent com-
plexity via multi-agent competition. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,
2018.
Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Carl Doersch, Kimberly Stachenfeld, Pushmeet Kohli, Pe-
ter Battaglia, and Jessica Hamrick. Structured agents for physical construction. In International
Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 464–474, 2019.
Marc Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Remi Munos.
Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pp. 1471–1479, 2016.
Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Deepak Pathak, Amos Storkey, Trevor Darrell, and Alexei A. Efros.
Large-scale study of curiosity-driven learning. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations , 2019a.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
distillation. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019b.
AD Channon, RI Damper, et al. Perpetuating evolutionary emergence. FROM ANIMALS TO ANI-
MATS 5 , pp. 534–539, 1998.
Nuttapong Chentanez, Andrew G Barto, and Satinder P Singh. Intrinsically motivated reinforcement
learning. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pp. 1281–1288, 2005.
Richard Dawkins and John Richard Krebs. Arms races between and within species. Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London. Series B. Biological Sciences , 205(1161):489–511, 1979.
Carlos Diuk, Andre Cohen, and Michael L Littman. An object-oriented representation for efﬁcient
reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on Machine learning ,
pp. 240–247. ACM, 2008.
Yan Duan, Marcin Andrychowicz, Bradly Stadie, Jonathan Ho, Jonas Schneider, Ilya Sutskever,
Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. One-shot imitation learning. In Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems , pp. 1087–1098, 2017.
Saˇso D ˇzeroski, Luc De Raedt, and Kurt Driessens. Relational reinforcement learning. Machine
learning , 43(1-2):7–52, 2001.
A.E. Elo. The rating of chessplayers, past and present . Arco Pub., 1978. ISBN 9780668047210.
URL https://books.google.com/books?id=8pMnAQAAMAAJ .
11Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Carlos Florensa, David Held, Markus Wulfmeier, Michael Zhang, and Pieter Abbeel. Reverse cur-
riculum generation for reinforcement learning. In Conference on Robot Learning , pp. 482–495,
2017.
Jakob Foerster, Ioannis Alexandros Assael, Nando de Freitas, and Shimon Whiteson. Learning to
communicate with deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pp. 2137–2145, 2016.
Jakob N Foerster, Gregory Farquhar, Triantafyllos Afouras, Nantas Nardelli, and Shimon Whiteson.
Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence , 2018.
S´ebastien Forestier, Yoan Mollard, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Intrinsically motivated goal explo-
ration processes with automatic curriculum learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.02190 , 2017.
Nick Haber, Damian Mrowca, Stephanie Wang, Li F Fei-Fei, and Daniel L Yamins. Learning to play
with intrinsically-motivated, self-aware agents. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , pp. 8388–8399, 2018.
Nicolas Heess, Srinivasan Sriram, Jay Lemmon, Josh Merel, Greg Wayne, Yuval Tassa, Tom Erez,
Ziyu Wang, SM Eslami, Martin Riedmiller, et al. Emergence of locomotion behaviours in rich
environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.02286 , 2017.
Ralf Herbrich, Tom Minka, and Thore Graepel. Trueskill: a bayesian skill rating system. In Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems , pp. 569–576, 2007.
Sepp Hochreiter and J ¨urgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation , 9(8):
1735–1780, 1997.
Rein Houthooft, Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John Schulman, Filip De Turck, and Pieter Abbeel. Vime:
Variational information maximizing exploration. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , pp. 1109–1117, 2016.
Gavin R Hunt. Manufacture and use of hook-tools by new caledonian crows. Nature , 379(6562):
249, 1996.
Max Jaderberg, Valentin Dalibard, Simon Osindero, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Jeff Donahue, Ali
Razavi, Oriol Vinyals, Tim Green, Iain Dunning, Karen Simonyan, et al. Population based train-
ing of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09846 , 2017.
Max Jaderberg, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Iain Dunning, Luke Marris, Guy Lever, Antonio Garcia
Casta ˜neda, Charles Beattie, Neil C. Rabinowitz, Ari S. Morcos, Avraham Ruderman, Nico-
las Sonnerat, Tim Green, Louise Deason, Joel Z. Leibo, David Silver, Demis Hassabis, Ko-
ray Kavukcuoglu, and Thore Graepel. Human-level performance in 3d multiplayer games with
population-based reinforcement learning. Science , 364(6443):859–865, 2019. ISSN 0036-8075.
doi: 10.1126/science.aau6249. URL https://science.sciencemag.org/content/
364/6443/859 .
Natasha Jaques, Angeliki Lazaridou, Edward Hughes, Caglar Gulcehre, Pedro Ortega, Dj Strouse,
Joel Z Leibo, and Nando De Freitas. Social inﬂuence as intrinsic motivation for multi-agent deep
reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 3040–3049, 2019.
Joel Lehman, Jeff Clune, Dusan Misevic, Christoph Adami, Lee Altenberg, Julie Beaulieu, Peter J
Bentley, Samuel Bernard, Guillaume Beslon, David M Bryson, et al. The surprising creativity of
digital evolution: A collection of anecdotes from the evolutionary computation and artiﬁcial life
research communities. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.03453 , 2018.
Joel Z Leibo, Vinicius Zambaldi, Marc Lanctot, Janusz Marecki, and Thore Graepel. Multi-agent
reinforcement learning in sequential social dilemmas. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference
on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems , pp. 464–473. International Foundation for Au-
tonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2017.
12Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Joel Z Leibo, Edward Hughes, Marc Lanctot, and Thore Graepel. Autocurricula and the emergence
of innovation from social interaction: A manifesto for multi-agent intelligence research. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1903.00742 , 2019a.
Joel Z Leibo, Julien Perolat, Edward Hughes, Steven Wheelwright, Adam H Marblestone, Edgar
Du´e˜nez-Guzm ´an, Peter Sunehag, Iain Dunning, and Thore Graepel. Malthusian reinforcement
learning. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi-
Agent Systems , pp. 1099–1107. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems, 2019b.
Siqi Liu, Guy Lever, Nicholas Heess, Josh Merel, Saran Tunyasuvunakool, and Thore Graepel.
Emergent coordination through competition. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations , 2019.
Ryan Lowe, Yi Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-agent actor-
critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems , pp. 6379–6390, 2017.
Shakir Mohamed and Danilo Jimenez Rezende. Variational information maximisation for intrinsi-
cally motivated reinforcement learning. In Advances in neural information processing systems ,
pp. 2125–2133, 2015.
Igor Mordatch and Pieter Abbeel. Emergence of grounded compositional language in multi-agent
populations. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2018.
Charles Ofria and Claus O Wilke. Avida: A software platform for research in computational evolu-
tionary biology. Artiﬁcial life , 10(2):191–229, 2004.
OpenAI. OpenAI Five. https://blog.openai.com/openai-five/ , 2018.
Georg Ostrovski, Marc G Bellemare, A ¨aron van den Oord, and R ´emi Munos. Count-based ex-
ploration with neural density models. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on
Machine Learning-Volume 70 , pp. 2721–2730. JMLR. org, 2017.
Jan Paredis. Coevolutionary computation. Artiﬁcial life , 2(4):355–375, 1995.
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
by self-supervised prediction. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 2778–2787,
2017.
Julien Perolat, Joel Z Leibo, Vinicius Zambaldi, Charles Beattie, Karl Tuyls, and Thore Graepel. A
multi-agent reinforcement learning model of common-pool resource appropriation. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 3643–3652, 2017.
Lerrel Pinto, Marcin Andrychowicz, Peter Welinder, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Asym-
metric actor critic for image-based robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.06542 , 2017.
Jordan B Pollack, Alan D Blair, and Mark Land. Coevolution of a backgammon player. In Artiﬁcial
Life V: Proc. of the Fifth Int. Workshop on the Synthesis and Simulation of Living Systems , pp.
92–98. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1997.
Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Giulia Vezzani, John Schulman, Emanuel
Todorov, and Sergey Levine. Learning complex dexterous manipulation with deep reinforcement
learning and demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.10087 , 2017.
Thomas S Ray. Evolution, ecology and optimization of digital organisms. Technical report, Citeseer,
1992.
Christopher D Rosin and Richard K Belew. Methods for competitive co-evolution: Finding oppo-
nents worth beating. In ICGA , pp. 373–381, 1995.
J¨urgen Schmidhuber. A possibility for implementing curiosity and boredom in model-building neu-
ral controllers. In Proc. of the international conference on simulation of adaptive behavior: From
animals to animats , pp. 222–227, 1991.
13Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-
dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.02438 , 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017.
Robert W Shumaker, Kristina R Walkup, and Benjamin B Beck. Animal tool behavior: the use and
manufacture of tools by animals . JHU Press, 2011.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature , 529(7587):484, 2016.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering chess and shogi
by self-play with a general reinforcement learning algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01815 ,
2017.
Karl Sims. Evolving virtual creatures. In Proceedings of the 21st annual conference on Computer
graphics and interactive techniques , pp. 15–22. ACM, 1994a.
Karl Sims. Evolving 3d morphology and behavior by competition. Artiﬁcial life , 1(4):353–372,
1994b.
Satinder Singh, Richard L Lewis, Andrew G Barto, and Jonathan Sorg. Intrinsically motivated
reinforcement learning: An evolutionary perspective. IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental
Development , 2(2):70–82, 2010.
L Soros and Kenneth Stanley. Identifying necessary conditions for open-ended evolution through
the artiﬁcial life world of chromaria. In Artiﬁcial Life Conference Proceedings 14 , pp. 793–800.
MIT Press, 2014.
Bradly C Stadie, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Incentivizing exploration in reinforcement
learning with deep predictive models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.00814 , 2015.
Kenneth O Stanley and Risto Miikkulainen. Competitive coevolution through evolutionary com-
plexiﬁcation. Journal of artiﬁcial intelligence research , 21:63–100, 2004.
Alexander L Strehl and Michael L Littman. An analysis of model-based interval estimation for
markov decision processes. Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 74(8):1309–1331, 2008.
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Rob Fergus, et al. Learning multiagent communication with backpropaga-
tion. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 2244–2252, 2016.
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Zeming Lin, Ilya Kostrikov, Gabriel Synnaeve, Arthur Szlam, and Rob Fer-
gus. Intrinsic motivation and automatic curricula via asymmetric self-play. In International
Conference on Learning Representations , 2018.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction . MIT press, 2018.
Haoran Tang, Rein Houthooft, Davis Foote, Adam Stooke, Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John Schulman,
Filip DeTurck, and Pieter Abbeel. # exploration: A study of count-based exploration for deep
reinforcement learning. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pp. 2753–2762,
2017.
Tim Taylor. Requirements for open-ended evolution in natural and artiﬁcial systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1507.07403 , 2015.
Gerald Tesauro. Temporal difference learning and td-gammon. Communications of the ACM , 38(3):
58–68, 1995.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
In2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , pp. 5026–5033.
IEEE, 2012.
14Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information
processing systems , pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Junyoung Chung, Michael Mathieu, Max Jaderberg, et al. AlphaS-
tar: Mastering the real-time strategy game StarCraft II. https://deepmind.com/blog/
alphastar-mastering-real-time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/ , 2019.
Rui Wang, Joel Lehman, Jeff Clune, and Kenneth O Stanley. Paired open-ended trailblazer (poet):
Endlessly generating increasingly complex and diverse learning environments and their solutions.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.01753 , 2019.
Annie Xie, Frederik Ebert, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Improvisation through physical un-
derstanding: Using novel objects as tools with visual foresight. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05538 ,
2019.
Larry Yaeger. Computational genetics, physiology, metabolism, neural systems, learning, vision,
and behavior or poly world: Life in a new context. In SANTA FE INSTITUTE STUDIES
IN THE SCIENCES OF COMPLEXITY-PROCEEDINGS VOLUME- , volume 17, pp. 263–263.
ADDISON-WESLEY PUBLISHING CO, 1994.
Vinicius Zambaldi, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Victor Bapst, Yujia Li, Igor Babuschkin, Karl
Tuyls, David Reichert, Timothy Lillicrap, Edward Lockhart, et al. Relational deep reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01830 , 2018.
15Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Appendix
Table of Contents
A Further Emergence Results 17
A.1 Trajectory Traces From Each Stage of Emergent Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
A.2 Dependence of Skill Emergence on Randomness in the Training Distribution of
Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
A.3 Quadrant Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
A.4 Further Ablations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
A.5 Evaluating Agents at Different Phases of Emergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
A.6 Alternative Games to Hide-and-Seek with Secondary Objectives . . . . . . . . . 20
A.7 Zero-shot generalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
B Optimization Details 23
B.1 Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
B.2 Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
B.3 Generalized advantage estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
B.4 Normalization of observations, advantage targets and value function targets . . . 24
B.5 Optimization setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
B.6 Optimization hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
B.7 Policy architecture details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
C Intelligence Test Suite Details 25
C.1 Cognition and memory task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
C.2 Manipulation task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
D Intrinsic Motivation Methods 26
D.1 Counted-Based Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
D.2 Random Network Distillation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
D.3 Fine-tuning From Intrinsic Motivation Variants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
16Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
A F URTHER EMERGENCE RESULTS
A.1 T RAJECTORY TRACES FROM EACH STAGE OF EMERGENT STRATEGY
Figure A.1: Trajectory Traces From Each Stage of Emergent Strategy. Rows correspond to different
strategies, columns to characteristic snapshots in chronological order within an episode that show-
case the strategy. Running and chasing : Hiders (blue) try to hide behind walls and moveable objects,
and seekers (red) chase and search for hiders. Fort building: During the preparation phase (ﬁrst 3
snapshots), hiders build a fort out of 3 boxes and hide inside. Seekers are not able to overcome this
barrier during the remainder of the trial. Ramp use: During the preparation phase, hiders build a
fort out of 2 boxes and a wall (1st and 2nd snapshot). After the preparation phase, a seeker grabs a
ramp (3rd snapshot), drags it towards the fort (4th snapshot) and uses it to enter the fort (5th snap-
shot). Ramp defense: Hiders prevent ramp use by dragging ramps away and locking them in place
during the preparation phase (1st, 2nd and 3rd snapshot). They then build a fort in safe distance
from the ramps (4th snapshot). After the preparation phase, seekers are not able to enter the fort
(5th snapshot). Box surﬁng: A single hider locks both ramps in place and hides inside a fort built
from 2 boxes and an interior wall during the preparation phase (1st and 2nd snapshot). The seeker
grabs a square box (3rd snapshot) and drags it next to one of the locked ramps to jump on top (4th
snapshot). It then “surfs” on the box to the edge of the fort and jumps inside (5th snapshot). Surf
defense : During the preparation phase, hiders lock all ramps and boxes in place (1st, 2nd and 3rd
snapshot) and construct a fort out of 3 boxes (4th snapshot). After the preparation phase, seekers are
not able to enter the fort (5th snapshot).
A.2 D EPENDENCE OF SKILL EMERGENCE ON RANDOMNESS IN THE TRAINING
DISTRIBUTION OF ENVIRONMENTS
Discovering tool use is a difﬁcult exploration problem, as only a very speciﬁc set of actions will
lead to an increase in reward. During training, we ﬁnd that randomization over many components
of our environment, such as the number of agents in each team, the number of boxes, the shape of
boxes (square or elongated), the initial location of agents and objects and the presence and location
of interior and exterior walls helps emergence, despite leading to a broader training distribution. As
we successively reduce the amount of randomization, we ﬁnd that fewer stages of skill progression
emerges, and with at times less sophisticated strategies (e.g. hiders learn to run away and use boxes
as moveable shields), Table A.1.
17Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
team size # boxes box shapeinitial
locationwalls emergence
1-3 3-9 random random random 6 stages
1 3-9 random random random 6 stages
1 7 ﬁxed random random 6 stages
1-3 3-9 random random no walls 4 stages
1 3-9 random random no walls 2 stages
1 7 ﬁxed random no walls 2 stages
1 7 ﬁxed ﬁxed no walls 2 stages
Hiders run away and use boxes as movable shields.
Table A.1: Number of stages of emergence for different levels of environmental randomization
(batch size is held constant).
Figure A.2: Sample Trajectory Traces From Each Stage of Emergent Strategy in the Quadrant En-
vironment. Rows correspond to different strategies, columns to characteristic snapshots in chrono-
logical order within an episode that showcase the strategy. Running and chasing : Hiders (blue) try
to hide behind walls and moveable objects, seekers (red) chase and search for hiders. Fort building:
During the preparation phase (ﬁrst 3 snapshots), hiders push the two boxes into the two doors of
the lower right room and lock them in place. Seekers are not able to overcome this barrier during
the remainder of the trial. Ramp use: During the preparation phase, hiders secure the room using
the two boxes (1st and 2nd snapshot). After the preparation phase, a seeker grabs the ramp (3rd
snapshot), drags it towards the walls of the room (4th snapshot) and both seekers use the ramp to
enter the room (5th snapshot). Ramp defense: Hiders prevent ramp use by grabbing the ramp during
the preparation phase (2nd snapshot), pulling it inside the room (3rd snapshot), and then secure the
doors using the 2 blocks (4th snapshot). After the preparation phase, the seekers are not able to enter
the room (5th snapshot). Also, note that while one hider brings the ramp into the room, the other
hider drags a box out of corner and then passes it to its team mate (3rd and 4th snapshot), evidence
of sophisticated coordination between hiders.
A.3 Q UADRANT ENVIRONMENT
As well as the default random rooms environment described above, we also train and evaluate agents
in the much simpler quadrant environment (Figure A.2) for illustration purposes. This environment
consists of a room in the lower right corner that is connected by 1-2 doors to the remainder of the
environment. Unlike in the main environment, the interior walls are ﬁxed and only the location
of the doors vary from episode to episode. Hiders are spawned randomly in the environment, but
seekers are only spawned outside the room. Two cubic boxes are spawned inside the room and one
ramp is spawned inside or outside the room. Both hiders and seekers receive a negative reward if
they leave the environment or if they bring an object outside the environment. Also, in contrast to
the main environment, only boxes, but not ramps can be locked in place.
18Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
The quadrant environment gives rise to a similar skill progression as in the main environment (Figure
A.2): basic running and chasing, then fort building by hiders, ramp use by seekers, and ramp defense
by hiders. Hiders create shelter by pushing boxes into the doors of the room in the lower right corner,
preventing seekers from entering. Seekers drag ramps to the exterior walls of the room and then use
them to jump inside. As ramps are not lockable in this environment, hiders instead defend against
ramp use by pulling the ramp inside the room before securing the wall opening with boxes.
A.4 F URTHER ABLATIONS
Omniscient V Masked V020406080# Episodes (x106)  76.6M Ep89.2M EpOmniscient Value Function (Emergence Phase 3)
05101520
Time (Hours)19.7 Hr22.1 Hr
Self Attention Pooling04080120160 # Episodes (x106)  132.3M Ep145.4M EpEntity Aggregation
0102030
Time (Hours)34.0 Hr
30.8 Hr
Figure A.3: Effect of Omniscient Value Function and Pooling Architectures on Emergent Autocur-
ricula. In blue we show the number of episodes required and in orange the wall clock time required
to achieve stage 4 (ramp defense) of the emergent skill progression presented in Figure 1 for varying
batch and model sizes. Note that in our ablation comparing omniscient and masked value functions,
the experiment with a masked value function never reached stage 4 in the allotted time, so here we
compare timing to stage 3.
In Figure A.3 we compare the performance between a masked and omniscient value function as
well a purely pooling architecture versus self-attention. We ﬁnd that using an omniscient value
function, meaning that the value function has access to the full state of the unobscured environment,
is critical to progressing through the emergent autocurricula at the given scale. We found that with
the same compute budget, training with a masked value function never progressed past stage 3
(ramp usage). We further found that our self-attention architecture increases sample efﬁciency as
compared to an architecture that only embeds and then pools entities together with a similar number
of parameters. However, because self-attention requires more compute despite having the same
number of parameters, the wall-clock time to convergence is slightly slower.
A.5 E VALUATING AGENTS AT DIFFERENT PHASES OF EMERGENCE
0 2 4 6 810 12
Samples (x10 )0.00.20.40.60.81.0Normalized reward
0 1 2 3
Samples (x10 )0.00.20.40.60.81.0Normalized reward
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Samples (x10 )0.00.20.40.60.81.0Accuracy
0 1 2 3 4
Samples (x10 )0.00.20.40.60.81.0Normalized reward
0 1 2 3
Samples (x10 )0.00.20.40.60.81.0Normalized reward
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 Phase 4 Phase 5 Phase 6 BaselineObject Counting Lock and Return Sequential Lock Blueprint Construction Shelter Construction
Figure A.4: Fine-tuning From Different Phases in the Emergent Autocurriculum. We plot the mean
performance on the transfer suite and 90% conﬁdence interval across 3 seeds and smooth perfor-
mance and conﬁdence intervals with an exponential moving average. We show the ﬁne-tuning per-
formance for a policy sampled at each of the six phases of emergent strategy (see Figure 1).
In Figure A.4 we evaluate policies sampled during each phase of emergent strategy on the suite of
targeted intelligence tasks, by which we can gain intuition as to whether the capabilities we measure
improve with training, are transient and accentuated during speciﬁc phases, or generally uncorre-
lated to progressing through the autocurriculum. We ﬁnd that the hide-and-seek agent improves on
the navigation and memory tasks as it progresses; notably on Lock and Return, the performance
monotonically increases with emergence phase, and the policy from the phase 6 performs 20% bet-
ter than the policy from phase 1. However, performance on Object Counting is transient; during
19Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure A.5: Example trajectory in hide-and-seek environment with additional food reward. During
the preparation phase, hiders lock the ramps at the boundary of the play area (2nd snapshot) and
construct a fort around the food reward (3rd and 4th snapshot). After the preparation phase, hiders
can eat food and receive the additional food reward, because they are hidden from seekers inside the
fort.
phase 1 the hide-and-seek agent performs extremely well, much better than all baselines and other
phases but loses this ability in later stages. Finally, we ﬁnd that performance on the manipulation
tasks is relatively uncorrelated to the phases of emergence, and surprisingly the policy transferred
from phase 1, the phase before any tool use emerges, performs comparably well to other phases.
A.6 A LTERNATIVE GAMES TO HIDE-AND -SEEK WITH SECONDARY OBJECTIVES
A.6.1 H IDE-AND -SEEK WITH FOOD REWARD
In the main hide-and-seek environment, hiders build forts at locations that would give them the best
chance of staying hidden from seekers. To test whether hiders could be incentivized by a secondary
objective to adapt the location of forts, we add additional food rewards and test whether hiders
would bias the location of their forts towards the location of the food. In this environment, hiders
can eat food and receive food rewards only under the following conditions: after the preparation
phase, when all hiders are hidden from seekers and when the food is sufﬁciently close and visible to
them. Therefore, just chasing after food would not be an effective strategy for hiders, because hiders
receive neither hide-and-seek nor food rewards if one or more hiders are seen by a seeker. Instead,
hiders are incentivized to build forts around the location of food and then eat the food while being
unobserved by seekers (ﬁgure A.5).
Food is distributed in the form of 5 food pellets that are spawned close to each other in a rectangular
area in the center of the environment whose side length is 1/4 of the room size. Each food pellet can
provide a positive food reward of +1 for each time step. Food rewards are shared between hiders,
irrespective of which hider eats a food item. Hiders (as well as seekers) can observe the locations
of food pellets as separate entities; if food pellets are obstructed or outside the ﬁeld of view they are
masked out like other type of objects.
As shown in ﬁgure A.6, this environment gives rise to four levels of skill progression, similar to
the one of the main environment: basic running and chasing, then fort building by hiders, ramp use
by seekers, and ramp defense by hiders. Moreover, hiders consume food, and food consumption is
highly correlated with their ability to construct stable forts; food consumption decreases during the
initial phase as seekers get better at chasing and therefore prevent hiders from eating food. Food
consumption then increases again as hiders learn to construct forts and shield themselves from the
view of seekers, but plateaus once seekers learn to use ramps. Finally, food consumption rises again
as hiders get better at defending against ramp use.
A.6.2 H IDE-AND -SEEK WITH DYNAMIC FOOD
In the food variant introduce in Sec. A.6.1, the location of food pellets is ﬁxed throughout the
episode. Here we consider a dynamic food variant such that a food pellet will be eaten up, i.e.,
disappear, when a hider is close to it, and then a new food pellet will show up in a different location
but still within the center region. More precisely, the game area is simply an empty room without
outside walls containing 2 seekers, 3 hiders, 1 dynamic food and 8 elongated boxes. The food will
be always located within a square in the center of the environment with side length 1/5 of the game
area size. We inherit the same reward and policy structures from the previous game.
In this game, merely building a center fort is not sufﬁcient for obtaining the highest reward since
the food might disappear and respawn outside the fort. The agent must ensure that the fort is large
20Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
0 100 200 300 400
# Episodes (x106)−1000100200300400RewardReward
Seekers Hiders
0 100 200 300 400
# Episodes (x106)0100200300400500600700Food unitsFood consumption
0 100 200 300 400
# Episodes (x106)0.51.01.52.02.5Distance (m)Object Movement
Max Ramp Movement
Max Ramp Movement - PrepMax Box Movement
Max Box Movement - Prep
0 100 200 300 400
# Episodes (x106)0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0Number lockedObject Locking
Number Ramp Locked
Number Ramp Locked - PrepNumber Box Locked
Number Box Locked - Prep
Figure A.6: Reward and environment speciﬁc statistics during emergence in hide-and-seek with
secondary food rewards for hiders.
enough such that all the possible spawning positions of the food will be inside the fort. Such a
behavior does emerge after training for around 4:51010samples.
We also experimented on variants where the food spawning region has different side length. When
the side length is reduced to 1/6 of the game area, the same behavior emerges faster taking 1:51010
samples. However, when the side length of the dynamic food region is increased to 1/4 of the
game area, hiders converge to a policy that ignores the food and only builds a small fort to protect
themselves.
A.6.3 F OOD PROTECTION GAME
In the previous two variants, we introduce extra food reward to the hider in addition to the original
hide-and-seek reward for promoting more goal-oriented behavior. Now we consider a different
game rule such that the competition between hiders and seekers only depends on the food collecting
reward and show that this rule can also lead to tool use and complex behavior.
We consider an empty game area surrounded by walls that contains 50 food pellets randomly dis-
tributed in a center square of size 2/3 of the game environment. There are 3 hiders, 2 seekers and
7 elongated boxes in the game. The only goal for seekers is to collect food. Once a food pellet is
collected by any of the seeker, a +3 reward will be given to all the seekers and then the food will
disappear permanently from the game. The goal for the hider is to protect the food from seekers
and their reward is simply the negative value of seekers. Each episode consists of 200 time steps.
The preparation period, in which only hiders can move, extends to the ﬁrst 100 time steps. The last
60 steps of the game corresponds to a food collecting period, during which the hiders cannot move.
Additionally, after the preparation phase we also add a -1 “boundary penalty” for hiders when they
are too close to the wall to ensure they stay within the food region.
Our initial motivation for this task was to promote hiders to learn to construct complex and large fort
structures with a more direct competition pressure. For example, we expected that the agents would
learn to build a large fort that would cover as much food as possible. Unfortunately, such behavior
did not emerge. However, after around 71010samples of training, the hiders surprisingly discover
21Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure A.7: Example trajectory in the food protection game. During the preparation phase, the
hiders ﬁrst explore the room to ﬁnd seekers, then physically push the seekers to the corner and
eventually collaboratively grab elongated boxes to build a small fort surrounding the seekers to trap
them there. To secure the trap, they even learn to build the fort using twoelongated boxes to prevent
seekers from escaping.
1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
Number of hiders
−50
−25
0
25
50Hider reward
2
 3
 4
 5
Number of ramps
10
20
30
40
50Hider reward
5
 10
 15
 20
Number of boxes
20
30
40
50Hider reward
Figure A.8: Zero-shot generalization to a larger number of hiders (left), ramps (center) and boxes
(right). The dotted line denotes the boundary of the training distribution (1-3 hiders, 2 ramps, 1-9
boxes). Error bars denote standard error of the mean.
an extremely efﬁcient and effective strategy: they learn to physically ‘push’ the immobile seekers to
the corner of the environment during the preparation phase and then collaboratively use elongated
boxes to trap the seekers in the corner. Figure A.7 illustrates a trajectory corresponding to this
strategy. Interestingly, the hiders demonstrate strong collaborations. Since there are 2 seekers and 3
hiders, when the 2 hiders are pushing the seekers to the corner, the 3rd hider will follow the ‘pushing’
hiders distantly, and once the pushing hiders ﬁnish the job, this 3rd hider will quickly grab a box to
build the trap without blocking the escaping route of those 2 pushing hiders. We emphasize that this
behavior was completely surprising to us and further indicates that complex behavior can emerge
from multi-agent self-play with a wide range of competition rules.
Lastly, we also experimented with different versions of the close-to-wall “boundary penalties”. In
all cases, we observe similar fort-building behaviors, namely blocking the seekers to the corner,
with tiny variations. When we remove the penalty, the behavior emerges twice faster ( 3:51010
samples) and 1 hider will stay in the fort with the seekers instead of getting outside. When we
add the penalty throughout the episode, the hiders even learned to stay in the center region while
grabbing an elongated box as a tool to push the seekers towards the corner. However, the behavior
emerges twice slower in this setting, i.e., 1:41011samples required.
A.7 Z ERO-SHOT GENERALIZATION
We ﬁnd that the trained policies can zero-shot generalize to environments with slightly larger number
of hiders, ramps or boxes in Figure A.8. The hider reward provides a reasonably good measure for
generalization performance, since the modiﬁcations in question make constructing safe shelter more
difﬁcult. First, we looked at increasing the number of hiders from 1-3 hiders, as in the training
distribution, to 4-6 hiders; increasing the number of hiders decreases the hider reward because all
hiders need to stay hidden from seekers. However, the decline in hider reward is very gradual,
indicating that the policy generalizes well to more than 4 hiders. A similar effect occurs when
increasing the number of ramps because hiders need to secure more ramps from seekers. If we
increase the number of ramps from 2 to 3 or 4 the hider reward drops only gradually. Finally,
we ﬁnd hider performance is remarkably stable, though still slowly declines, when increasing the
number of boxes.
22Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
B O PTIMIZATION DETAILS
B.1 N OTATION
We consider the standard multi-agent reinforcement learning formalism of Nagents interacting with
each other in an environment. This interaction is deﬁned by a set of states Sdescribing the state of
the world and conﬁgurations of all agents, a set of observations O1;:::ONof all agents, a set of
actionsA1;:::;ANof all agents, a transition function T:SA1:::AN!S determining the
distribution over next states, and a reward for each agent iwhich is a function of the state and the
agent’s action. Agents choose their actions according to a stochastic policy i:OiAi![0;1],
whereiare the parameters of the policy. In our formulation, policies are shared between agents,
i=and the set of observations Ocontains information for which role (e.g. hider or seeker)
the agent will be rewarded. Each agent iaims to maximize its total expected discounted return
Ri=PH
t=0tri
t, whereHis the horizon length and is a time discounting factor that biases agents
towards preferring short term rewards to long term rewards. The action-value function is deﬁned as
Qi(st;ai
t) =E[Ri
tjst;ai
t], while the state-value function is deﬁned as Vi(st) =E[Rtjst]. The
advantage function Ai(st;ai
t) :=Qi(st;ai
t) Vi(st)describes whether taking action ai
tis better
or worse for agent iwhen in state stthan the average action of policy i.
B.2 P ROXIMAL POLICY OPTIMIZATION (PPO)
Policy gradient methods aim to estimate the gradient of the policy parameters with respect to the
discounted sum of rewards, which is often non-differentiable. A typical estimator of the policy
gradient isg:=E[^Atrlog], where ^Ais an estimate of the advantage function. PPO (Schulman
et al., 2017), a policy gradient variant, penalizes large changes to the policy to prevent training
instabilities. PPO optimizes the objective L=Eh
min(lt()^At;clip(lt();1 ;1 +)^Ati
, where
lt() =(atjst)
old(atjst)denotes the likelihood ratio between new and old policies and clip (lt();1 
;1 +)clipslt()in the interval [1 ;1 +].
B.3 G ENERALIZED ADVANTAGE ESTIMATION
We use Generalized Advantage Estimation (Schulman et al., 2015) with horizon length Hto estimate
the advantage function. This estimator is given by:
^AH
t=HX
l=0()lt+l; t+l:=rt+l+V(st+l+1) V(st+l)
wheret+lis the TD residual, ;2[0;1]are discount factors that control the bias-variance tradeoff
of the estimator, V(st)is the value function predicted by the value function network and we set
V(st) = 0 ifstis the last step of an episode. This estimator obeys the reverse recurrence relation
^AH
t=t+^AH 1
t+1.
We calculate advantage targets by concatenating episodes from policy rollouts and truncat-
ing them to windows of T= 160 time steps (episodes contain 240 time steps). If
a window (s0;:::;sT 1)was generated in a single episode we use the advantage targets
(^AH=T
0;^AH=T 1
1;:::; ^AH=1
T 1). If a new episode starts at time step jwe use the advantage targets
(^AH=j
0;^AH=j 1
1;:::; ^AH=1
j 1;^AH=T j
j;:::; ^AH=1
T 1).
Similarly we use as targets for the value function (^GH=T
0;^GH=T 1
1;:::; ^GH=1
T 1)for a window gen-
erated by a single episode and (^GH=j
0;^GH=j 1
1;:::; ^GH=1
j 1;^GH=T j
j;:::; ^GH=1
T 1)if a new episode
starts at time step j, where the return estimator is given by ^GH
t:=^AH
t+V(st). This value function
estimator corresponds to the TD( ) estimator (Sutton & Barto, 2018).
23Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
B.4 N ORMALIZATION OF OBSERVATIONS ,ADVANTAGE TARGETS AND VALUE FUNCTION
TARGETS
We normalize observations, advantage targets and value function targets. Advantage targets are z-
scored over each buffer before each optimization step. Observations and value function targets are
z-scored using a mean and variance estimator that is obtained from a running estimator with decay
parameter 1 10 5per optimization substep.
B.5 O PTIMIZATION SETUP
Training is performed using the distributed rapid framework (OpenAI, 2018). Using current policy
and value function parameters, CPU machines roll out the policy in the environment, collect rewards,
and compute advantage and value function targets. Rollouts are cut into windows of 160 timesteps
and reformatted into 16 chunks of 10 timesteps (the BPTT truncation length). The rollouts are then
collected in a training buffer of 320,000 chunks. Each optimization step consists of 60 SGD substeps
using Adam with mini-batch size 64,000. One rollout chunk is used for at most 4 optimization steps.
This ensures that the training buffer stays sufﬁciently on-policy.
B.6 O PTIMIZATION HYPERPARAMETERS
Our optimization hyperparameter settings are as follows:
Buffer size 320,000
Mini-batch size 64,000 chunks of 10 timesteps
Learning rate 310 4
PPO clipping parameter  0.2
Gradient clipping 5
Entropy coefﬁcient 0.01
 0.998
 0.95
Max GAE horizon length T 160
BPTT truncation length 10
B.7 P OLICY ARCHITECTURE DETAILS
Lidar observations are ﬁrst passed through a circular 1D-convolution and concatenated onto the
agents representation of self, xself. Each object is concatenated with xselfand then embedded with
a dense layer where parameters are shared between objects of the same type, e.g. all boxes share
the same embedding weights. All the embedded entities are then passed through a residual self-
attention block, similar to Vaswani et al. (2017) but without position embeddings, in the form of
y=dense (selfattention (x)) +x. We then average-pool entity embeddings and concatenate this
pooled representation to xself. Note that in the policy network the entities not observed by each
agent are masked away through self-attention and pooling. Finally, this pooled representation is
passed through another dense layer and an LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) before pulling
off separate action heads for each of the 3 action types described in Section 3. We also add layer
normalization (Ba et al., 2016) to every hidden layer of the policy network except the 1D-convolution
layer. We empirically observe that layer normalization leads to faster training and better transfer
performance.
Size of embedding layer 128
Size of MLP layer 256
Size of LSTM layer 256
Residual attention layer 4 attention heads of size 32
Weight decay coefﬁcient 10 6
24Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
C I NTELLIGENCE TESTSUITE DETAILS
All evaluation tasks in the intelligence test suite are single-agent tasks. In order to align the obser-
vations between the hide-and-seek environment and the evaluation tasks, we add fake hider obser-
vations, preparation phase observations and set them all to 0.
C.1 C OGNITION AND MEMORY TASK
All the variations of cognition and memory tasks have a horizon of 120 timesteps, and all boxes are
cuboids.
Object Counting:
An agent is pinned in place and watches as 6 boxes move either to left or right at random. The boxes
disappear behind walls such that agent can no longer see them, and the agent is asked to predict
how many boxes went left or right far after all the boxes have disappeared. In this test we evaluate
the quality of the existing representation by holding the agent’s policy ﬁxed and only train a new
classiﬁcation head from the agent’s LSTM state. The classiﬁcation head ﬁrst passes the LSTM state
through a layernorm and a single dense layer with 64 units. We then do a 7-class classiﬁcation
predicting whether 0 through 6 boxes have gone to the left.
Lock and Return:
In this game, the agent needs to navigate towards a hidden box, lock it, and then return to its starting
position.
The game area has 6 randomly generated connected rooms with static walls and 1 box. When
the box is locked, the agent will be given a reward of +5. If the agent unlocks the box during
the episode, a -5 penalty will be given. Additionally, if the box remains unlocked at the end of
the episode, the agent will be given another -5 penalty. A success is determined when the agent
returns to its starting location within 0.1 radius and with the box locked. For promoting fast task
accomplishment, we give the agent a +1 reward for each timestep of success. We also introduce
shaped reward with coefﬁcient of 0.5 for easier learning: at each time step, the shaped reward is the
decrement in the distance between the agent location towards the target (either the unlocked box or
the starting location).
Sequential Lock:
There are 4 boxes and the agent needs to lock all the boxes in an unobserved order sequentially. A
box can be locked only if it is locked in the right order.
The game area is randomly partition into three rooms with 2 walls. The 4 boxes are randomly placed
in the game area. Each room has a ramp. The agent has to utilize the ramps to navigate between
rooms. When a box is successfully locked (according to the order), a +5 bonus is given. If a box
is unlocked, -5 penalty will be added. When all the boxes get locked, the agent will receives a +1
per-timestep success bonus. We also use the same shaped distance reward as the lock and return
task here.
C.2 M ANIPULATION TASK
All variations of the manipulation task have 8 boxes, but no ramps.
Construction from Blueprint:
The horizon is at most 240 timesteps, but an episode can end early if the agent successfully ﬁnishes
the construction. The game area is an empty room. The locations of the construction sites are
sampled uniformly at random (we use rejection sampling to ensure that construction sites do not
overlap).
For each construction site, agents observe its position and that of its 4 corners. Since there are no
construction sites in the hide-and-seek game and the count-based baseline environments, we need to
change our policy architecture to integrate the new observations. Each construction site observation
is concatenated with xselfand then embedded through a new dense layer shared across all sites. This
25Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
dense layer is randomly initialized and added to the multi-agent and count-based policies before the
start of training. The embedded construction site representations are then concatenated with all
other embedded object representations before the residual self-attention block, and the rest of the
architecture is the same as the one used in the hide-and-seek game.
The reward at each timestep is equal to a reward scale constant times the mean of the smooth min-
imum of the distances between each construction site corner and every box corner. Let there be k
construction sites and nboxes, and let dijbe the distance between construction site corner iand box
cornerj, and letdibe the smooth minimum of the distances from construction site corner ito all
box corners. The reward at each timestep follows the following formula:
di=0
@4nX
j=1dijedij1
A=4nX
j=1edij8i= 1;2;:::; 4k
rew =sd 4kX
i=1di!
=4k
Here,sdis the reward scale parameter and is the smoothness hyperparameter ( must be non-
positive;= 0 gives us the mean, and ! 1 gives us the regular min function). In addition,
when all construction sites have a box placed within a certain distance dminof them, and all con-
struction site corners have a box corner located within dminof them, the episode ends and all agents
receive reward equal to sck, wherescis a separate reward scale parameter. For our experiment,
n= 8 andkis randomly sampled between 1 and 4 (inclusive) every episode. The hyperparameter
values we use for the reward are the following:
= 1:5
sd= 0:05
dmin= 0:1
sc= 3
Shelter construction: The goal of the task is to build a shelter around a cylinder that is randomly
placed in the play area. The horizon is 150 timesteps, and the game area is an empty room. The
location of the cylinder is uniformly sampled at random a minimum distance away from the edges
of the room (this is because if the cylinder is too close to the external walls of the room, the agents
are physically unable to complete the whole shelter). The diameter of the cylinder is uniformly
randomly sampled between dminanddmax. There are 3 movable elongated boxes and 5 movable
square boxes. There are 100 rays that originate from evenly spaced locations on the bounding walls
of the room and target the cylinder placed within the room. The reward at each timestep is ( ns),
wherenis the number of raycasts that collide with the cylinder that timestep and sis the reward
scale hyperparameter.
We use the following hyperparameters:
s= 0:001
dmin= 1:5
dmax= 2
D I NTRINSIC MOTIVATION METHODS
We inherit the same policy architecture as well as optimization hyperparameters as used in the hide-
and-seek game.
Note that only the Sequential Lock task in the transfer suite contains ramps, so for the other 4 tasks
we remove ramps in the environment for training intrinsic motivation agents.
D.1 C OUNTED -BASED EXPLORATION
For each real value from the continuous state of interest, we discretize it into 30 bins. Then we
randomly project each of these discretized integers into a discrete embedding of dimension 16 with
26Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
integer value ranging from 0 to 9. Here we use discrete embeddings for the purpose of accurate
hashing. For each input entity, we concatenate all its obtained discrete embeddings as this entity’s
feature embedding. An max-pooling is performed over the feature embeddings of all the entities
belonging to each object type (i.e., agent, lidar, box and ramp) to obtain a entity-invariant object
representation. Finally, concatenating all the derived object representations results in the ﬁnal state
representation to count.
We run a decentralized version of the count-based exploration where each parallel rollout worker
shares the same random projection for computing embeddings but maintains its own counts. Let
N(S)denote the counts for state Sin a particular rollout worker. Then the intrinsic reward is
calculated by0:1p
N(S).
D.2 R ANDOM NETWORK DISTILLATION
Random Network Distillation (RND) (Burda et al., 2019b) uses a ﬁxed random network, i.e., a target
network, to produce a random projection for each state while learns anther network, i.e., a predictor
network, to ﬁt the output from the target network on visited states. The prediction error between two
networks is used as the intrinsic motivation.
For the random target network, we use the same architecture as the value network except that we
remove the LSTM layer and project the ﬁnal layer to a 64 dimensional vector instead of a single
value. The architecture is the same for predictor network. We use the squared difference between
predictor and target network output with an coefﬁcient of 1.0 as the intrinsic reward.
D.3 F INE-TUNING FROM INTRINSIC MOTIVATION VARIANTS
We compare the performances of different policies pretrained by intrinsic motivation variants on our
intelligence test suites in Figure D.1. The pretraining methods of consideration include RND and 3
different count-based exploration variants with different state representations. For policies trained
by count-based variants, as discussed in the Section 6.1, we know that more concise state represen-
tation for counts leads to better emergent object manipulation skills, i.e., only using object position
is better than using position and velocity information while using all the input as state representa-
tion performs the worst. In our transfer task suites, we observe that polices with better pretrained
skills perform better in 3 of the 5 tasks except the Object Counting task and the Construction from
Blueprint task. In Construction from Blueprint , policies with better skills adapt better in the early
phase but may have a higher chance of failure later in this challenging task. In Object Counting ,
the polices with better skills perform worse. Interestingly, this observation is consistent with the
transfer result in the main paper (Figure 6), where the policy pretrained by count-based exploration
outperforms the multi-agent pretrained policy. We conjecture that the Object Counting task exam-
ines some factors of the agents that may not strongly relate to the quality of emergent skills, such as
navigation and tool use.
27Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
0 1 2 3
Samples (x10 )0.00.20.40.60.81.0Normalized reward
0 1 2 3
Samples (x10 )0.00.20.40.60.81.0Normalized reward
012345678
Samples (x10 )0.00.20.40.60.81.0Normalized reward
0.00.5 1.01.52.02.53.03.5
Samples (x10 )0.00.20.40.60.81.0Normalized reward
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
Samples (x10 )0.00.20.40.60.81.0AccuracyObject Counting Lock and Return Sequential Lock Blueprint Construction Shelter Construction
Count-Based, 1 Agent ~ Box Position Count-Based, 1 Agent ~ Full Box Count-Based, 1-3 Agents ~ Full RND, 1-3 Agents ~ Full
Figure D.1: Fine-tuning From Intrinsic Motivation Variants. We plot the mean performance on
the suite of transfer tasks and 90% conﬁdence interval across 3 seeds and smooth performance and
conﬁdence intervals with an exponential moving average. We vary the state representation used for
collecting counts: in blue we show the performance for a single agent where the state is deﬁned
on box 2-D positions, in green we show the performance of a single agent where the state is box
position but also box rotation and velocity, in red we show the performance of 1-3 agents with the full
observation space given to a hide-and-seek policy, and ﬁnally in purple we show the performance
also with 1-3 agents and a full observation space but with RND which should scale better than
count-based exploration.
28