DEEPDOUBLE DESCENT :
WHERE BIGGER MODELS AND MORE DATA HURT
Preetum Nakkiran
Harvard UniversityGal Kapluny
Harvard UniversityYamini Bansaly
Harvard UniversityTristan Yang
Harvard University
Boaz Barak
Harvard UniversityIlya Sutskever
OpenAI
ABSTRACT
We show that a variety of modern deep learning tasks exhibit a “double-descent”
phenomenon where, as we increase model size, performance ﬁrst gets worse and
then gets better. Moreover, we show that double descent occurs not just as a
function of model size, but also as a function of the number of training epochs.
We unify the above phenomena by deﬁning a new complexity measure we call
theeffective model complexity and conjecture a generalized double descent with
respect to this measure. Furthermore, our notion of model complexity allows us to
identify certain regimes where increasing (even quadrupling) the number of train
samples actually hurts test performance.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Figure 1: Left: Train and test error as a function of model size, for ResNet18s of varying width
on CIFAR-10 with 15% label noise. Right: Test error, shown for varying train epochs. All models
trained using Adam for 4K epochs. The largest model (width 64) corresponds to standard ResNet18.
The bias-variance trade-off is a fundamental concept in classical statistical learning theory (e.g.,
Hastie et al. (2005)). The idea is that models of higher complexity have lower bias but higher vari-
ance. According to this theory, once model complexity passes a certain threshold, models “overﬁt”
with the variance term dominating the test error, and hence from this point onward, increasing model
complexity will only decrease performance (i.e., increase test error). Hence conventional wisdom
in classical statistics is that, once we pass a certain threshold, “larger models are worse. ”
However, modern neural networks exhibit no such phenomenon. Such networks have millions of
parameters, more than enough to ﬁt even random labels (Zhang et al. (2016)), and yet they perform
much better on many tasks than smaller models. Indeed, conventional wisdom among practitioners
is that “larger models are better’ ’ (Krizhevsky et al. (2012), Huang et al. (2018), Szegedy et al.
Work performed in part while Preetum Nakkiran was interning at OpenAI, with Ilya Sutskever. We espe-
cially thank Mikhail Belkin and Christopher Olah for helpful discussions throughout this work. Correspondence
Email: preetum@cs.harvard.edu
yEqual contribution
1arXiv:1912.02292v1  [cs.LG]  4 Dec 2019Figure 2: Left: Test error as a function of model size and train epochs. The horizontal line corre-
sponds to model-wise double descent–varying model size while training for as long as possible. The
vertical line corresponds to epoch-wise double descent, with test error undergoing double-descent
as train time increases. Right Train error of the corresponding models. All models are Resnet18s
trained on CIFAR-10 with 15% label noise, data-augmentation, and Adam for up to 4K epochs.
(2015), Radford et al. (2019)). The effect of training time on test performance is also up for debate.
In some settings, “early stopping” improves test performance, while in other settings training neu-
ral networks to zero training error only improves performance. Finally, if there is one thing both
classical statisticians and deep learning practitioners agree on is “more data is always better” .
In this paper, we present empirical evidence that both reconcile and challenge some of the above
“conventional wisdoms.” We show that many deep learning settings have two different regimes.
In the under-parameterized regime, where the model complexity is small compared to the number
of samples, the test error as a function of model complexity follows the U-like behavior predicted
by the classical bias/variance tradeoff. However, once model complexity is sufﬁciently large to
interpolate i.e., achieve (close to) zero training error, then increasing complexity only decreases test
error, following the modern intuition of “bigger models are better”. Similar behavior was previously
observed in Opper (1995; 2001), Advani & Saxe (2017), Spigler et al. (2018), and Geiger et al.
(2019b). This phenomenon was ﬁrst postulated in generality by Belkin et al. (2018) who named
it “double descent”, and demonstrated it for decision trees, random features, and 2-layer neural
networks with `2loss, on a variety of learning tasks including MNIST and CIFAR-10.
Main contributions. We show that double descent is a robust phenomenon that occurs in a variety
of tasks, architectures, and optimization methods (see Figure 1 and Section 5; our experiments are
summarized in Table A). Moreover, we propose a much more general notion of “double descent”
that goes beyond varying the number of parameters. We deﬁne the effective model complexity (EMC)
of a training procedure as the maximum number of samples on which it can achieve close to zero
training error. The EMC depends not just on the data distribution and the architecture of the classiﬁer
but also on the training procedure—and in particular increasing training time will increase the EMC.
We hypothesize that for many natural models and learning algorithms, double descent occurs as a
function of the EMC. Indeed we observe “epoch-wise double descent” when we keep the model ﬁxed
and increase the training time, with performance following a classical U-like curve in the underﬁtting
stage (when the EMC is smaller than the number of samples) and then improving with training time
once the EMC is sufﬁciently larger than the number of samples (see Figure 2). As a corollary, early
stopping only helps in the relatively narrow parameter regime of critically parameterized models.
Sample non-monotonicity. Finally, our results shed light on test performance as a function of
the number of train samples. Since the test error peaks around the point where EMC matches the
number of samples (the transition from the under- to over-parameterization), increasing the number
of samples has the effect of shifting this peak to the right. While in most settings increasing the
number of samples decreases error, this shifting effect can sometimes result in a setting where more
data is worse! For example, Figure 3 demonstrates cases in which increasing the number of samples
by a factor of 4:5results in worse test performance.
2Figure 3: Test loss (per-token perplexity) as a
function of Transformer model size (embed-
ding dimension dmodel ) on language trans-
lation (IWSLT‘14 German-to-English). The
curve for 18k samples is generally lower than
the one for 4k samples, but also shifted to
the right, since ﬁtting 18k samples requires
a larger model. Thus, for some models, the
performance for 18k samples is worse than
for 4k samples.
2 O UR RESULTS
To state our hypothesis more precisely, we deﬁne the notion of effective model complexity . We deﬁne
atraining procedure Tto be any procedure that takes as input a set S=f(x1;y1);:::; (xn;yn)g
of labeled training samples and outputs a classiﬁer T(S)mapping data to labels. We deﬁne the
effective model complexity ofT(w.r.t. distribution D) to be the maximum number of samples non
whichTachieves on average 0training error .
Deﬁnition 1 (Effective Model Complexity) TheEffective Model Complexity (EMC) of a training
procedureT, with respect to distribution Dand parameter >0, is deﬁned as:
EMCD;(T) := maxfnjESDn[ErrorS(T(S))]g
where ErrorS(M)is the mean error of model Mon train samples S.
Our main hypothesis can be informally stated as follows:
Hypothesis 1 (Generalized Double Descent hypothesis, informal) For any natural data distribu-
tionD, neural-network-based training procedure T, and small  > 0, if we consider the task of
predicting labels based on nsamples fromDthen:
Under-paremeterized regime. IfEMCD;(T)is sufﬁciently smaller than n, any perturbation of T
that increases its effective complexity will decrease the test error.
Over-parameterized regime. IfEMCD;(T)is sufﬁciently larger than n, any perturbation of T
that increases its effective complexity will decrease the test error.
Critically parameterized regime. IfEMCD;(T)n, then a perturbation of Tthat increases its
effective complexity might decrease or increase the test error.
Hypothesis 1 is informal in several ways. We do not have a principled way to choose the parameter
(and currently heuristically use = 0:1). We also are yet to have a formal speciﬁcation for
“sufﬁciently smaller” and “sufﬁciently larger”. Our experiments suggest that there is a critical
interval around the interpolation threshold when EMCD;(T) =n: below and above this interval
increasing complexity helps performance, while within this interval it may hurt performance. The
width of the critical interval depends on both the distribution and the training procedure in ways we
do not yet completely understand.
We believe Hypothesis 1 sheds light on the interaction between optimization algorithms, model size,
and test performance and helps reconcile some of the competing intuitions about them. The main
result of this paper is an experimental validation of Hypothesis 1 under a variety of settings, where
we considered several natural choices of datasets, architectures, and optimization algorithms, and
we changed the “interpolation threshold” by varying the number of model parameters, the length of
training, the amount of label noise in the distribution, and the number of train samples.
Model-wise Double Descent. In Section 5, we study the test error of models of increasing size,
for a ﬁxed large number of optimization steps. We show that “model-wise double-descent” occurs
for various modern datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, IWSLT‘14 de-en, with varying amounts of
label noise), model architectures (CNNs, ResNets, Transformers), optimizers (SGD, Adam), number
3of train samples, and training procedures (data-augmentation, and regularization). Moreover, the
peak in test error systematically occurs at the interpolation threshold. In particular, we demonstrate
realistic settings in which bigger models are worse .
Epoch-wise Double Descent. In Section 6, we study the test error of a ﬁxed, large architecture over
the course of training. We demonstrate, in similar settings as above, a corresponding peak in test
performance when models are trained just long enough to reach 0train error. The test error of a
large model ﬁrst decreases (at the beginning of training), then increases (around the critical regime),
then decreases once more (at the end of training)—that is, training longer can correct overﬁtting.
Sample-wise Non-monotonicity. In Section 7, we study the test error of a ﬁxed model and training
procedure, for varying number of train samples. Consistent with our generalized double-descent
hypothesis, we observe distinct test behavior in the “critical regime”, when the number of samples
is near the maximum that the model can ﬁt. This often manifests as a long plateau region, in which
taking signiﬁcantly more data might not help when training to completion (as is the case for CNNs on
CIFAR-10). Moreover, we show settings (Transformers on IWSLT‘14 en-de), where this manifests
as a peak—and for a ﬁxed architecture and training procedure, more data actually hurts.
Remarks on Label Noise. We observe all forms of double descent most strongly in settings with
label noise in the train set (as is often the case when collecting train data in the real-world). How-
ever, we also show several realistic settings with a test-error peak even without label noise: ResNets
(Figure 4a) and CNNs (Figure 20) on CIFAR-100; Transformers on IWSLT‘14 (Figure 8). More-
over, all our experiments demonstrate distinctly different test behavior in the critical regime— often
manifesting as a “plateau” in the test error in the noiseless case which develops into a peak with
added label noise. See Section 8 for further discussion.
3 R ELATED WORK
Model-wise double descent was ﬁrst proposed as a general phenomenon by Belkin et al. (2018).
Similar behavior had been observed in Opper (1995; 2001), Advani & Saxe (2017), Spigler et al.
(2018), and Geiger et al. (2019b). Subsequently, there has been a large body of work studying the
double descent phenomenon. A growing list of papers that theoretically analyze it in the tractable
setting of linear least squares regression includes Belkin et al. (2019); Hastie et al. (2019); Bartlett
et al. (2019); Muthukumar et al. (2019); Bibas et al. (2019); Mitra (2019); Mei & Montanari (2019).
Moreover, Geiger et al. (2019a) provide preliminary results for model-wise double descent in con-
volutional networks trained on CIFAR-10. Our work differs from the above papers in two crucial
aspects: First, we extend the idea of double-descent beyond the number of parameters to incorpo-
rate the training procedure under a uniﬁed notion of “Effective Model Complexity”, leading to novel
insights like epoch-wise double descent and sample non-monotonicity. The notion that increasing
train time corresponds to increasing complexity was also presented in Nakkiran et al. (2019). Sec-
ond, we provide an extensive and rigorous demonstration of double-descent for modern practices
spanning a variety of architectures, datasets optimization procedures. An extended discussion of the
related work is provided in Appendix C.
4 E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
We brieﬂy describe the experimental setup here; full details are in Appendix B1. We consider three
families of architectures: ResNets, standard CNNs, and Transformers. ResNets: We parameterize
a family of ResNet18s (He et al. (2016)) by scaling the width (number of ﬁlters) of convolutional
layers. Speciﬁcally, we use layer widths [k;2k;4k;8k]for varying k. The standard ResNet18
corresponds to k= 64 .Standard CNNs: We consider a simple family of 5-layer CNNs, with
4 convolutional layers of widths [k;2k;4k;8k]for varying k, and a fully-connected layer. For
context, the CNN with width k= 64 , can reach over 90% test accuracy on CIFAR-10 with data-
augmentation. Transformers: We consider the 6 layer encoder-decoder from Vaswani et al. (2017),
as implemented by Ott et al. (2019). We scale the size of the network by modifying the embedding
dimensiondmodel, and setting the width of the fully-connected layers proportionally ( dff= 4dmodel).
1The raw data from our experiments are available at: https://gitlab.com/
harvard-machine-learning/double-descent/tree/master
4For ResNets and CNNs, we train with cross-entropy loss, and the following optimizers: (1) Adam
with learning-rate 0:0001 for 4K epochs; (2) SGD with learning rate /1p
Tfor 500K gradient steps.
We train Transformers for 80K gradient steps, with 10% label smoothing and no drop-out.
Label Noise. In our experiments, label noise of probability prefers to training on a samples which
have the correct label with probability (1 p), and a uniformly random incorrect label otherwise
(label noise is sampled only once and not per epoch). Figure 1 plots test error on the noisy distribu-
tion, while the remaining ﬁgures plot test error with respect to the clean distribution (the two curves
are just linear rescaling of one another).
5 M ODEL -WISE DOUBLE DESCENT
(a)CIFAR-100. There is a peak in test error even
with no label noise.
(b)CIFAR-10. There is a “plateau” in test error
around the interpolation point with no label noise,
which develops into a peak for added label noise.
Figure 4: Model-wise double descent for ResNet18s. Trained on CIFAR-100 and CIFAR-10, with
varying label noise. Optimized using Adam with LR 0:0001 for 4K epochs, and data-augmentation.
In this section, we study the test error of models of increasing size, when training to completion
(for a ﬁxed large number of optimization steps). We demonstrate model-wise double descent across
different architectures, datasets, optimizers, and training procedures. The critical region exhibits
distinctly different test behavior around the interpolation point and there is often a peak in test error
that becomes more prominent in settings with label noise.
For the experiments in this section (Figures 4, 5, 6, 7, 8), notice that all modiﬁcations which increase
the interpolation threshold (such as adding label noise, using data augmentation, and increasing the
number of train samples) also correspondingly shift the peak in test error towards larger models.
Additional plots showing the early-stopping behavior of these models, and additional experiments
showing double descent in settings with no label noise (e.g. Figure 19) are in Appendix E.2. We
also observed model-wise double descent for adversarial training, with a prominent robust test error
peak even in settings without label noise. See Figure 26 in Appendix E.2.
Discussion. Fully understanding the mechanisms behind model-wise double descent in deep neu-
ral networks remains an important open question. However, an analog of model-wise double descent
occurs even for linear models. A recent stream of theoretical works analyzes this setting (Bartlett
et al. (2019); Muthukumar et al. (2019); Belkin et al. (2019); Mei & Montanari (2019); Hastie et al.
(2019)). We believe similar mechanisms may be at work in deep neural networks.
Informally, our intuition is that for model-sizes at the interpolation threshold, there is effectively
only one model that ﬁts the train data and this interpolating model is very sensitive to noise in the
5(a) Without data augmentation.
 (b) With data augmentation.
Figure 5: Effect of Data Augmentation. 5-layer CNNs on CIFAR10, with and without data-
augmentation. Data-augmentation shifts the interpolation threshold to the right, shifting the test
error peak accordingly. Optimized using SGD for 500K steps. See Figure 27 for larger models.
Figure 6: SGD vs. Adam. 5-Layer CNNs
on CIFAR-10 with no label noise, and no
data augmentation. Optimized using SGD
for 500K gradient steps, and Adam for 4K
epochs.
Figure 7: Noiseless settings. 5-layer
CNNs on CIFAR-100 with no label noise;
note the peak in test error. Trained with
SGD and no data augmentation. See Fig-
ure 20 for the early-stopping behavior of
these models.
train set and/or model mis-speciﬁcation. That is, since the model is just barely able to ﬁt the train
data, forcing it to ﬁt even slightly-noisy or mis-speciﬁed labels will destroy its global structure, and
result in high test error. (See Figure 28 in the Appendix for an experiment demonstrating this noise
sensitivity, by showing that ensembling helps signiﬁcantly in the critically-parameterized regime).
However for over-parameterized models, there are many interpolating models that ﬁt the train set,
and SGD is able to ﬁnd one that “memorizes” (or “absorbs”) the noise while still performing well
on the distribution.
The above intuition is theoretically justiﬁed for linear models. In general, this situation manifests
even without label noise for linear models (Mei & Montanari (2019)), and occurs whenever there
6Figure 8: Transformers on language trans-
lation tasks: Multi-head-attention encoder-
decoder Transformer model trained for
80k gradient steps with labeled smoothed
cross-entropy loss on IWSLT‘14 German-
to-English (160K sentences) and WMT‘14
English-to-French (subsampled to 200K sen-
tences) dataset. Test loss is measured as per-
token perplexity.
ismodel mis-speciﬁcation between the structure of the true distribution and the model family. We
believe this intuition extends to deep learning as well, and it is consistent with our experiments.
6 E POCH -WISE DOUBLE DESCENT
In this section, we demonstrate a novel form of double-descent with respect to training epochs,
which is consistent with our uniﬁed view of effective model complexity (EMC) and the generalized
double descent hypothesis. Increasing the train time increases the EMC—and thus a sufﬁciently
large model transitions from under- to over-parameterized over the course of training.
Figure 9: Left: Training dynamics for models in three regimes. Models are ResNet18s on CIFAR10
with 20% label noise, trained using Adam with learning rate 0:0001 , and data augmentation. Right:
Test error over (Model size Epochs). Three slices of this plot are shown on the left.
As illustrated in Figure 9, sufﬁciently large models can undergo a “double descent” behavior where
test error ﬁrst decreases then increases near the interpolation threshold, and then decreases again. In
contrast, for “medium sized” models, for which training to completion will only barely reach 0
error, the test error as a function of training time will follow a classical U-like curve where it is
better to stop early. Models that are too small to reach the approximation threshold will remain in
the “under parameterized” regime where increasing train time monotonically decreases test error.
Our experiments (Figure 10) show that many settings of dataset and architecture exhibit epoch-wise
double descent, in the presence of label noise. Further, this phenomenon is robust across optimizer
variations and learning rate schedules (see additional experiments in Appendix E.1). As in model-
wise double descent, the test error peak is accentuated with label noise.
Conventional wisdom suggests that training is split into two phases: (1) In the ﬁrst phase, the net-
work learns a function with a small generalization gap (2) In the second phase, the network starts
to over-ﬁt the data leading to an increase in test error. Our experiments suggest that this is not the
complete picture—in some regimes, the test error decreases again and may achieve a lower value at
the end of training as compared to the ﬁrst minimum (see Fig 10 for 10% label noise).
7(a) ResNet18 on CIFAR10.
 (b) ResNet18 on CIFAR100.
 (c) 5-layer CNN on CIFAR 10.
Figure 10: Epoch-wise double descent for ResNet18 and CNN (width=128). ResNets trained using
Adam with learning rate 0:0001 , and CNNs trained with SGD with inverse-squareroot learning rate.
7 S AMPLE -WISE NON-MONOTONICITY
In this section, we investigate the effect of varying the number of train samples, for a ﬁxed model and
training procedure. Previously, in model-wise and epoch-wise double descent, we explored behavior
in the critical regime, where EMCD;(T)n, by varying the EMC. Here, we explore the critical
regime by varying the number of train samples n. By increasing n, the same training procedure T
can switch from being effectively over-parameterized to effectively under-parameterized.
We show that increasing the number of samples has two different effects on the test error vs. model
complexity graph. On the one hand, (as expected) increasing the number of samples shrinks the area
under the curve. On the other hand, increasing the number of samples also has the effect of “shifting
the curve to the right” and increasing the model complexity at which test error peaks.
(a) Model-wise double descent for 5-layer CNNs
on CIFAR-10, for varying dataset sizes. Top:
There is a range of model sizes (shaded green)
where training on 2more samples does not im-
prove test error. Bottom: There is a range of
model sizes (shaded red) where training on 4
more samples does not improve test error.
(b)Sample-wise non-monotonicity. Test loss
(per-word perplexity) as a function of number of
train samples, for two transformer models trained
to completion on IWSLT’14. For both model
sizes, there is a regime where more samples hurt
performance. Compare to Figure 3, of model-wise
double-descent in the identical setting.
Figure 11: Sample-wise non-monotonicity.
8These twin effects are shown in Figure 11a. Note that there is a range of model sizes where the
effects “cancel out”—and having 4more train samples does not help test performance when
training to completion. Outside the critically-parameterized regime, for sufﬁciently under- or over-
parameterized models, having more samples helps. This phenomenon is corroborated in Figure 12,
which shows test error as a function of both model and sample size, in the same setting as Figure 11a.
Figure 12: Left: Test Error as a function of model size and number of train samples, for 5-layer
CNNs on CIFAR-10 + 20% noise. Note the ridge of high test error again lies along the interpolation
threshold. Right: Three slices of the left plot, showing the effect of more data for models of
different sizes. Note that, when training to completion, more data helps for small and large models,
but does not help for near-critically-parameterized models (green).
In some settings, these two effects combine to yield a regime of model sizes where more data actually
hurts test performance as in Figure 3 (see also Figure 11b). Note that this phenomenon is not unique
to DNNs: more data can hurt even for linear models (see Appendix D).
8 C ONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
We introduce a generalized double descent hypothesis: models and training procedures exhibit atyp-
ical behavior when their Effective Model Complexity is comparable to the number of train samples.
We provide extensive evidence for our hypothesis in modern deep learning settings, and show that
it is robust to choices of dataset, architecture, and training procedures. In particular, we demon-
strate “model-wise double descent” for modern deep networks and characterize the regime where
bigger models can perform worse. We also demonstrate “epoch-wise double descent,” which, to the
best of our knowledge, has not been previously proposed. Finally, we show that the double descent
phenomenon can lead to a regime where training on more data leads to worse test performance.
Preliminary results suggest that double descent also holds as we vary the amount of regularization
for a ﬁxed model (see Figure 22).
We also believe our characterization of the critical regime provides a useful way of thinking for
practitioners—if a model and training procedure are just barely able to ﬁt the train set, then small
changes to the model or training procedure may yield unexpected behavior (e.g. making the model
slightly larger or smaller, changing regularization, etc. may hurt test performance).
Early stopping. We note that many of the phenomena that we highlight often do not occur with
optimal early-stopping. However, this is consistent with our generalized double descent hypothesis:
if early stopping prevents models from reaching 0train error then we would not expect to see double-
descent, since the EMC does not reach the number of train samples. Further, we show at least one
9setting where model-wise double descent can still occur even with optimal early stopping (ResNets
on CIFAR-100 with no label noise, see Figure 19). We have not observed settings where more data
hurts when optimal early-stopping is used. However, we are not aware of reasons which preclude
this from occurring. We leave fully understanding the optimal early stopping behavior of double
descent as an important open question for future work.
Label Noise. In our experiments, we observe double descent most strongly in settings with label
noise. However, we believe this effect is not fundamentally about label noise, but rather about
model mis-speciﬁcation . For example, consider a setting where the label noise is not truly random,
but rather pseudorandom (with respect to the family of classiﬁers being trained). In this setting,
the performance of the Bayes optimal classiﬁer would not change (since the pseudorandom noise
is deterministic, and invertible), but we would observe an identical double descent as with truly
random label noise. Thus, we view adding label noise as merely a proxy for making distributions
“harder”— i.e. increasing the amount of model mis-speciﬁcation.
Other Notions of Model Complexity. Our notion of Effective Model Complexity is related to
classical complexity notions such as Rademacher complexity, but differs in several crucial ways:
(1) EMC depends on the true labels of the data distribution, and (2) EMC depends on the training
procedure, not just the model architecture.
Other notions of model complexity which do not incorporate features (1) and (2) would not sufﬁce
to characterize the location of the double-descent peak. Rademacher complexity, for example, is
determined by the ability of a model architecture to ﬁt a randomly-labeled train set. But Rademacher
complexity and VC dimension are both insufﬁcient to determine the model-wise double descent
peak location, since they do not depend on the distribution of labels— and our experiments show
that adding label noise shifts the location of the peak.
Moreover, both Rademacher complexity and VC dimension depend only on the model family and
data distribution, and not on the training procedure used to ﬁnd models. Thus, they are not capable
of capturing train-time double-descent effects, such as “epoch-wise” double descent, and the effect
of data-augmentation on the peak location.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Mikhail Belkin for extremely useful discussions in the early stages of this work. We
thank Christopher Olah for suggesting the Model Size Epoch visualization, which led to the
investigation of epoch-wise double descent, as well as for useful discussion and feedback. We also
thank Alec Radford, Jacob Steinhardt, and Vaishaal Shankar for helpful discussion and suggestions.
P.N. thanks OpenAI, the Simons Institute, and the Harvard Theory Group for a research environment
that enabled this kind of work.
We thank Dimitris Kalimeris, Benjamin L. Edelman, and Sharon Qian, and Aditya Ramesh for
comments on an early draft of this work.
This work supported in part by NSF grant CAREER CCF 1452961, BSF grant 2014389, NSF US-
ICCS proposal 1540428, a Google Research award, a Facebook research award, a Simons Investiga-
tor Award, a Simons Investigator Fellowship, and NSF Awards CCF 1715187, CCF 1565264, CCF
1301976, IIS 1409097, and CNS 1618026. Y .B. would like to thank the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
for contributing computational resources for experiments.
REFERENCES
Madhu S Advani and Andrew M Saxe. High-dimensional dynamics of generalization error in neural
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.03667 , 2017.
Peter L Bartlett, Philip M Long, G ´abor Lugosi, and Alexander Tsigler. Benign overﬁtting in linear
regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.11300 , 2019.
Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, Siyuan Ma, and Soumik Mandal. Reconciling modern machine learning
and the bias-variance trade-off. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.11118 , 2018.
10Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, and Ji Xu. Two models of double descent for weak features. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1903.07571 , 2019.
Koby Bibas, Yaniv Fogel, and Meir Feder. A new look at an old problem: A universal learning
approach to linear regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.04708 , 2019.
Mauro Cettolo, Christian Girardi, and Marcello Federico. Wit3: Web inventory of transcribed and
translated talks. In Proceedings of the 16thConference of the European Association for Machine
Translation (EAMT) , pp. 261–268, Trento, Italy, May 2012.
Mario Geiger, Arthur Jacot, Stefano Spigler, Franck Gabriel, Levent Sagun, St ´ephane d’Ascoli,
Giulio Biroli, Cl ´ement Hongler, and Matthieu Wyart. Scaling description of generalization with
number of parameters in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.01608 , 2019a.
Mario Geiger, Stefano Spigler, St ´ephane d’Ascoli, Levent Sagun, Marco Baity-Jesi, Giulio Biroli,
and Matthieu Wyart. Jamming transition as a paradigm to understand the loss landscape of deep
neural networks. Physical Review E , 100(1):012115, 2019b.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572 , 2014.
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, Jerome Friedman, and James Franklin. The elements of statistical
learning: data mining, inference and prediction. The Mathematical Intelligencer , 27(2):83–85,
2005.
Trevor Hastie, Andrea Montanari, Saharon Rosset, and Ryan J Tibshirani. Surprises in high-
dimensional ridgeless least squares interpolation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.08560 , 2019.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Identity mappings in deep residual
networks. In European conference on computer vision , pp. 630–645. Springer, 2016.
Yanping Huang, Yonglong Cheng, Dehao Chen, HyoukJoong Lee, Jiquan Ngiam, Quoc V . Le, and
Zhifeng Chen. Gpipe: Efﬁcient training of giant neural networks using pipeline parallelism.
CoRR , abs/1811.06965, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.06965 .
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, 2009.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convo-
lutional neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pp. 1097–1105,
2012.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083 ,
2017.
Song Mei and Andrea Montanari. The generalization error of random features regression: Precise
asymptotics and double descent curve. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.05355 , 2019.
Partha P. Mitra. Understanding overﬁtting peaks in generalization error: Analytical risk curves for
l2 and l1 penalized interpolation. ArXiv , abs/1906.03667, 2019.
Vidya Muthukumar, Kailas V odrahalli, and Anant Sahai. Harmless interpolation of noisy data in
regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.09139 , 2019.
Preetum Nakkiran, Gal Kaplun, Dimitris Kalimeris, Tristan Yang, Benjamin L Edelman, Fred
Zhang, and Boaz Barak. Sgd on neural networks learns functions of increasing complexity. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.11604 , 2019.
Manfred Opper. Statistical mechanics of learning: Generalization. The Handbook of Brain Theory
and Neural Networks, 922-925. , 1995.
Manfred Opper. Learning to generalize. Frontiers of Life, 3(part 2), pp.763-775. , 2001.
11Myle Ott, Sergey Edunov, Alexei Baevski, Angela Fan, Sam Gross, Nathan Ng, David Grangier,
and Michael Auli. fairseq: A fast, extensible toolkit for sequence modeling. In Proceedings of
NAACL-HLT 2019: Demonstrations , 2019.
David Page. How to train your resnet. https://myrtle.ai/
how-to-train-your-resnet-4-architecture/ , 2018.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito,
Zeming Lin, Alban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer. Automatic differentiation in
PyTorch. In NeurIPS Autodiff Workshop , 2017.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
Ali Rahimi and Benjamin Recht. Random features for large-scale kernel machines. In Advances in
neural information processing systems , pp. 1177–1184, 2008.
Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. Neural machine translation of rare words with
subword units. ArXiv , abs/1508.07909, 2015.
Stefano Spigler, Mario Geiger, St ´ephane d’Ascoli, Levent Sagun, Giulio Biroli, and Matthieu Wyart.
A jamming transition from under-to over-parametrization affects loss landscape and generaliza-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.09665 , 2018.
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Du-
mitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
1409.4842 .
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. CoRR , abs/1706.03762, 2017.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
deep learning requires rethinking generalization. ICLR , abs/1611.03530, 2016.
12A S UMMARY TABLE OF EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Double-Descent
Dataset Architecture Opt. Aug. % Noise Model Epoch Figure(s)
CIFAR 10 CNN SGD X 0 7 7 5, 27
X 10 X X 5, 27, 6
X 20 X X 5, 27
0 7 7 5, 25
10 X X 5
20 X X 5
SGD + w.d. X 20 X X 21
Adam 0 X – 25
ResNet Adam X 0 7 7 4, 10
X 5 X – 4
X 10 X X 4, 10
X 15 X X 4, 2
X 20 X X 4, 9, 10
Various X 20 – X 16, 17, 18
(subsampled) CNN SGD X 10 X – 11a
SGD X 20 X – 11a, 12
(adversarial) ResNet SGD 0 Robust err. – 26
CIFAR 100 ResNet Adam X 0 X 7 4, 19, 10
X 10 X X 4, 10
X 20 X X 4, 10
CNN SGD 0 X 7 20
IWSLT ’14 de-en Transformer Adam 0 X 7 8, 24
(subsampled) Transformer Adam 0 X 7 11b, 23
WMT ’14 en-fr Transformer Adam 0 X 7 8, 24
B A PPENDIX : EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
B.1 M ODELS
We use the following families of architectures. The PyTorch Paszke et al. (2017)
speciﬁcation of our ResNets and CNNs are available at https://gitlab.com/
harvard-machine-learning/double-descent/tree/master .
ResNets. We deﬁne a family of ResNet18s of increasing size as follows. We follow the Preac-
tivation ResNet18 architecture of He et al. (2016), using 4 ResNet blocks, each consisting of two
BatchNorm-ReLU-Convolution layers. The layer widths for the 4 blocks are [k;2k;4k;8k]for
varyingk2Nand the strides are [1, 2, 2, 2]. The standard ResNet18 corresponds to k= 64 con-
volutional channels in the ﬁrst layer. The scaling of model size with kis shown in Figure 13b. Our
implementation is adapted from https://github.com/kuangliu/pytorch-cifar .
Standard CNNs. We consider a simple family of 5-layer CNNs, with four Conv-BatchNorm-
ReLU-MaxPool layers and a fully-connected output layer. We scale the four convolutional layer
widths as [k;2k;4k;8k]. The MaxPool is [1, 2, 2, 8]. For all the convolution layers, the kernel
size = 3, stride = 1 and padding=1. This architecture is based on the “backbone” architecture from
Page (2018). For k= 64 , this CNN has 1558026 parameters and can reach >90% test accuracy on
CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky (2009)) with data-augmentation. The scaling of model size with kis shown
in Figure 13a.
Transformers. We consider the encoder-decoder Transformer model from Vaswani et al. (2017)
with 6 layers and 8 attention heads per layer, as implemented by fairseq Ott et al. (2019). We scale
the size of the network by modifying the embedding dimension ( dmodel), and scale the width of the
fully-connected layers proportionally ( dff= 4dmodel). We train with 10% label smoothing and no
drop-out, for 80 gradient steps.
13(a) 5-layer CNNs
 (b) ResNet18s
 (c) Transformers
Figure 13: Scaling of model size with our parameterization of width & embedding dimension.
B.2 I MAGE CLASSIFICATION : EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
We describe the details of training for CNNs and ResNets below.
Loss function: Unless stated otherwise, we use the cross-entropy loss for all the experiments.
Data-augmentation: In experiments where data-augmentation was used, we apply
RandomCrop(32, padding=4) andRandomHorizontalFlip . In experiments with
added label noise, the label for all augmentations of a given training sample are given the same
label.
Regularization: No explicit regularization like weight decay or dropout was applied unless explic-
itly stated.
Initialization: We use the default initialization provided by PyTorch for all the layers.
Optimization:
Adam: Unless speciﬁed otherwise, learning rate was set at constant to 1e 4and all other
parameters were set to their default PyTorch values.
SGD: Unless speciﬁed otherwise, learning rate schedule inverse-square root (deﬁned be-
low) was used with initial learning rate 0= 0:1and updates every L= 512 gradient steps.
No momentum was used.
We found our results are robust to various other natural choices of optimizers and learning rate
schedule. We used the above settings because (1) they optimize well, and (2) they do not require
experiment-speciﬁc hyperparameter tuning, and allow us to use the same optimization across many
experiments.
Batch size : All experiments use a batchsize of 128.
Learning rate schedule descriptions:
Inverse-square root (0;L): At gradient step t, the learning rate is set to (t) :=
0p
1+bt=512c. We set learning-rate with respect to number of gradient steps, and not epochs,
in order to allow comparison between experiments with varying train-set sizes.
Dynamic drop ( 0, drop, patience) : Starts with an initial learning rate of 0and drops by
a factor of ’drop’ if the training loss has remained constant or become worse for ’patience’
number of gradient steps.
B.3 N EURAL MACHINE TRANSLATION : EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Here we describe the experimental setup for the neural machine translation experiments.
Training procedure.
14In this setting, the distribution Dconsists of triples
(x;y;i ) :x2V
src; y2V
tgt; i2f0;:::;jyjg
whereVsrcandVtgtare the source and target vocabularies, the string xis a sentence in the source
language,yis its translation in the target language, and iis the index of the token to be predicted by
the model. We assume that ijx;yis distributed uniformly on f0;:::;jyjg.
A standard probabilistic model deﬁnes an autoregressive factorization of the likelihood:
pM(yjx) =jyjY
i=1pM(yijy<i;x):
Given a set of training samples S, we deﬁne
ErrorS(M) =1
jSjX
(x;y;i )2S logpM(yijy<i;x):
In practice, Sisnotconstructed from independent samples from D, but rather by ﬁrst sampling
(x;y)and then including all (x;y;0);:::; (x;y;jyj)inS.
For training transformers, we replicate the optimization procedure speciﬁed in Vaswani et al. (2017)
section 5.3, where the learning rate schedule consists of a “warmup” phase with linearly increasing
learning rate followed by a phase with inverse square-root decay. We preprocess the data using byte
pair encoding (BPE) as described in Sennrich et al. (2015). We use the implementation provided by
fairseq ( https://github.com/pytorch/fairseq ).
Datasets. The IWSLT ’14 German to English dataset contains TED Talks as described in Cettolo
et al. (2012). The WMT ’14 English to French dataset is taken from http://www.statmt.
org/wmt14/translation-task.html .
B.4 P ER-SECTION EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
Here we provide full details for experiments in the body, when not otherwise provided.
Introduction: Experimental Details Figure 1: All models were trained using Adam with learning-
rate 0.0001 for 4K epochs. Plotting means and standard deviations for 5 trials, with random network
initialization.
Model-wise Double Descent: Experimental Details Figure 7: Plotting means and standard devia-
tions for 5 trials, with random network initialization.
Sample-wise Nonmonotonicity: Experimental Details Figure 11a: All models are trained with
SGD for 500K epochs, and data-augmentation. Bottom: Means and standard deviations from 5
trials with random initialization, and random subsampling of the train set.
15C E XTENDED DISCUSSION OF RELATED WORK
Belkin et al. (2018): This paper proposed, in very general terms, that the apparent contradiction
between traditional notions of the bias-variance trade-off and empirically successful practices in
deep learning can be reconciled under a double-descent curve—as model complexity increases, the
test error follows the traditional “U-shaped curve”, but beyond the point of interpolation, the error
starts to decrease . This work provides empirical evidence for the double-descent curve with fully
connected networks trained on subsets of MNIST, CIFAR10, SVHN and TIMIT datasets. They use
thel2loss for their experiments. They demonstrate that neural networks are not an aberration in this
regard—double-descent is a general phenomenon observed also in linear regression with random
features and random forests.
Theoretical works on linear least squares regression: A variety of papers have attempted to the-
oretically analyze this behavior in restricted settings, particularly the case of least squares regression
under various assumptions on the training data, feature spaces and regularization method.
1. Advani & Saxe (2017); Hastie et al. (2019) both consider the linear regression problem
stated above and analyze the generalization behavior in the asymptotic limit N;D!1
using random matrix theory. Hastie et al. (2019) highlight that when the model is mis-
speciﬁed, the minimum of training error can occur for over-parameterized models
2. Belkin et al. (2019) Linear least squares regression for two data models, where the input
data is sampled from a Gaussian and a Fourier series model for functions on a circle. They
provide a ﬁnite-sample analysis for these two cases
3. Bartlett et al. (2019) provides generalization bounds for the minimum l2-norm interpolant
for Gaussian features
4. Muthukumar et al. (2019) characterize the fundamental limit of of any interpolating solu-
tion in the presence of noise and provide some interesting Fourier-theoretic interpretations.
5. Mei & Montanari (2019): This work provides asymptotic analysis for ridge regression over
random features
Similar double descent behavior was investigated in Opper (1995; 2001)
Geiger et al. (2019b) showed that deep fully connected networks trained on the MNIST dataset with
hinge loss exhibit a “jamming transition” when the number of parameters exceeds a threshold that
allows training to near-zero train loss. Geiger et al. (2019a) provide further experiments on CIFAR-
10 with a convolutional network. They also highlight interesting behavior with ensembling around
the critical regime, which is consistent with our informal intuitions in Section 5 and our experiments
in Figures 28, 29.
Advani & Saxe (2017); Geiger et al. (2019b;a) also point out that double-descent is not observed
when optimal early-stopping is used.
16D R ANDOM FEATURES : A C ASE STUDY
Figure 14: Random Fourier Features on the Fashion MNIST dataset. The setting is equivalent
to two-layer neural network with e ixactivation, with randomly-initialized ﬁrst layer that is ﬁxed
throughout training. The second layer is trained using gradient ﬂow.
In this section, for completeness sake, we show that both the model- and sample-wise double de-
scent phenomena are not unique to deep neural networks—they exist even in the setting of Random
Fourier Features of Rahimi & Recht (2008). This setting is equivalent to a two-layer neural network
withe ixactivation. The ﬁrst layer is initialized with a N(0;1
d)Gaussian distribution and then
ﬁxed throughout training. The width (or embedding dimension) dof the ﬁrst layer parameterizes
the model size. The second layer is initialized with 0s and trained with MSE loss.
Figure 14 shows the grid of Test Error as a function of both number of samples nand model size d.
Note that in this setting EMC =d(the embedding dimension). As a result, as demonstrated in the
ﬁgure, the peak follows the path of n=d. Both model-wise and sample-wise (see ﬁgure 15) double
descent phenomena are captured, by horizontally and vertically crossing the grid, respectively.
Figure 15: Sample-wise double-descent slice for Random Fourier Features on the Fashion MNIST
dataset. In this ﬁgure the embedding dimension (number of random features) is 1000.
17E A PPENDIX : ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
E.1 E POCH -WISE DOUBLE DESCENT : ADDITIONAL RESULTS
Here, we provide a rigorous evaluation of epoch-wise double descent for a variety of optimizers and
learning rate schedules. We train ResNet18 on CIFAR-10 with data-augmentation and 20% label
noise with three different optimizers—Adam, SGD, SGD + Momentum (momentum set to 0.9) and
three different learning rate schedules—constant, inverse-square root, dynamic drop for differnet
values of initial learning rate. We observe that double-descent occurs reliably for all optimizers and
learning rate schedules and the peak of the double descent curve shifts with the interpolation point.
(a) Constant learning rate
 (b) Inverse-square root learning
rate
(c) Dynamic learning rate
Figure 16: Epoch-wise double descent for ResNet18 trained with Adam and multiple learning rate
schedules
A practical recommendation resulting from epoch-wise double descent is that stopping the training
when the test error starts to increase may not always be the best strategy. In some cases, the test error
may decrease again after reaching a maximum, and the ﬁnal value may be lower than the minimum
earlier in training.
(a) Constant learning rate
 (b) Inverse-square root learning
rate
(c) Dynamic learning rate
Figure 17: Epoch-wise double descent for ResNet18 trained with SGD and multiple learning rate
schedules
18(a) Constant learning rate
 (b) Inverse-square root learning
rate
(c) Dynamic learning rate
Figure 18: Epoch-wise double descent for ResNet18 trained with SGD+Momentum and multiple
learning rate schedules
E.2 M ODEL -WISEDOUBLE DESCENT : ADDITIONAL RESULTS
E.2.1 C LEAN SETTINGS WITHMODEL -WISE DOUBLE DESCENT
CIFAR100, ResNet18
Figure 19: Top: Train and test performance as a function of both model size and train epochs.
Bottom: Test error dynamics of the same model (ResNet18, on CIFAR-100 with no label noise,
data-augmentation and Adam optimizer trained for 4k epochs with learning rate 0.0001). Note that
even with optimal early stopping this setting exhibits double descent.
19CIFAR100, Standard CNN
Figure 20: Top: Train and test performance as a function of both model size and train epochs.
Bottom: Test error dynamics of the same models. 5-Layer CNNs, CIFAR-100 with no label noise,
no data-augmentation Trained with SGD for 1e6 steps. Same experiment as Figure 7.
20E.2.2 W EIGHT DECAY
Figure 21: Left: Test error dynamics with weight decay of 5e-4 (bottom left) and without weight
decay (top left). Right: Test and train error and test loss for models with varying amounts of
weight decay. All models are 5-Layer CNNs on CIFAR-10 with 10% label noise, trained with
data-augmentation and SGD for 500K steps.
Here, we now study the effect of varying the level of regularization on test error. We train CIFAR10
with data-augmentation and 20% label noise on ResNet18 for weight decay co-efﬁcients rang-
ing from 0 to 0.1. We train the networks using SGD + inverse-square root learning rate. Figure
below shows a picture qualitatively very similar to that observed for model-wise double descent
wherein ”model complexity” is now controlled by the regularization parameter. This conﬁrms our
generalized double descent hypothesis along yet another axis of Effective Model Complexity.
(a) Test Error
 (b) Train Loss
Figure 22: Generalized double descent for weight decay. We found that using the same initial
learning rate for all weight decay values led to training instabilities. This resulted in some noise in
the Test Error (Weight Decay Epochs) plot shown above.
21E.2.3 E ARLY STOPPING DOES NOT EXHIBIT DOUBLE DESCENT
Language models
Figure 23: Model-wise test error dynamics for a subsampled IWSLT‘14 dataset. Left: 4k samples,
Right: 18k samples. Note that with optimal early-stopping, more samples is always better.
Figure 24: Model-wise test error dynamics for a IWSLT‘14 de-en and subsampled WMT‘14 en-fr
datasets. Left: IWSLT‘14, Right : subsampled (200k samples) WMT‘14. Note that with optimal
early-stopping, the test error is much lower for this task.
CIFAR10, 10% noise, SGD
Figure 25: Top: Train and test performance as a function of both model size and train epochs.
Bottom: Test error dynamics of the same model (CNN, on CIFAR-10 with 10% label noise, data-
augmentation and SGD optimizer with learning rate /1=p
T).
22E.2.4 T RAINING PROCEDURE
Figure 26: Model-wise double descent for adversarial training ResNet18s on CIFAR-10 (sub-
sampled to 25k train samples) with no label noise. We train for L2 robustness of radius = 0:5and
= 1:0, using 10-step PGD (Goodfellow et al. (2014); Madry et al. (2017)). Trained using SGD
(batch size 128) with learning rate 0:1for 400 epochs, then 0:01for 400 epochs.
Figure 27
23E.3 E NSEMBLING
Figure 28: Effect of Ensembling (ResNets, 15% label noise). Test error of an ensemble of 5
models, compared to the base models. The ensembled classiﬁer is determined by plurality vote over
the 5 base models. Note that emsembling helps most around the critical regime. All models are
ResNet18s trained on CIFAR-10 with 15% label noise, using Adam for 4K epochs (same setting
as Figure 1). Test error is measured against the original (not noisy) test set, and each model in the
ensemble is trained using a train set with independently-sampled 15% label noise.
Figure 29: Effect of Ensembling (CNNs, no label noise). Test error of an ensemble of 5 models,
compared to the base models. All models are 5-layer CNNs trained on CIFAR-10 with no label
noise, using SGD and no data augmentation. (same setting as Figure 7).
24